This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized 
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the 
information in books and make it universally accessible. 

Google" books 

http://books.google.com 



LIBRARY OF THE 
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA 



J. Douglas Bruce 
"Staunton Eill" 
Virginia 




Digitized by L^ooQle 


CoS*, VU-ov^ \li)u <T\ 
jT cy.~c ^ 5 J ^ tr, cj} , 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



Digitized by Google 



Catholic StanOarb library . 

VOLUME ONE 

THE GREAT COMMENTARY 

OF 

CORNELIUS A LAPIDE 


Digitized by Google 



Digitized by L^ooQle 


THE 


GREAT COMMENTARY 

OF 

CORNELIUS A LAPIDE 

TRANSLATED BY 

THOMAS W. MOSSMAN, B. A., 

RECTOR OR TORRi NOTON, LINCOLNSHIRE 

ASSISTED BY VARIOUS SCHOLARS 


* Atf* ' ; - * : • • 


S. MATTHEW’S GOSPEL. -CHAPS. I TO IX 

l 

8IXTH EDITION 


EDINBURGH: JOHN GRANT 

31 GEORGE IV. BRIDGE 

1908 



Digitized by G.oooLe 



255 * 5 " 

. 3 

,U33 

1^0? 

>/. I 

Co Cl5 ' 


Digitized by 


GENERAL PREFACE 


CONCERNING 

THE EXCELLENCE AND MAJESTY 

OF 

THE FOUR GOSPELS. 


I PROCEED from the Old Testament to the New, from 
Solomon to Christ, as from a rivulet to a fountain: from 
Proverbs to Gospels, as from a river to the Ocean of Wisdom. 
Speaking of the Gospels I would place a crown upon the Scrip- 
tures of the New Testament. 

The dignity, usefulness, and majesty of Scripture are so great 
that it surpasses the books of all philosophers and theologians, 
both Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, as much as Divine surpasses 
human wisdom. For Scripture is the Word of God. It is the 
very utterance of God, by means of which God enunciates His 
wisdom to us, and points out to us the way to virtue, health, and 
eternal happiness. S. Augustine asserts that “ Sacred Scripture 
Is an Encyclop/edia of all the sciences. Here is Natural Philo- 
sophy, because all the causes of all creatures are in God, the 
Creator. Here is Moral Philosophy, because a good and honest 
life is derived from no other source than the love of God and our 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



vi 


GENERAL PREFACE. 


neighbour as they ought to be loved. Here Is Logic, because 
Truth and the Light of the rational soul are God. Here is 
Political Science, for a really flourishing State can neither be 
founded nor preserved except upon the foundation, and by the 
bond of faith, and firm concord, when the common good of all is 
loved : that is to say, when God is loved above all things, and 
when men love one another in Him, and for His sake.” After 
an interval he adds, “ By the Scriptures depraved minds are cor- 
rected, little minds are nourished, great minds are delighted. 
The only minds which are hostile to this doctrine are those which 
either by going astray know not its healthfulness, or being sick 
dislike its medicine.” 

Sacred Scripture is the art of arts, the science of sciences : it is 
the Pandora of Wisdom. In our own time, S. Theresa, a woman 
endowed with the spirit of prophecy, and renowned throughout 
all Spain for the glory of her miracles, and the sanctity of her 
life, was taught by God that all the troubles of the Church, all the 
evils in the world, flow from this source, that men do not, by clear 
and sound knowledge, and serious consideration, penetrate into 
the verities of Sacred Scripture. See Franciscus Ribera in 
her Life. 

S. Basil (Horn, in Ps. l) says, “Holy Scripture is the uni- 
versal depository of medicine for the cure of souls. From it 
every one may select the remedy which is salutary and appro- 
priate for his own disease.” 

Thus it was that in the age of the martyrs, the Church drew 
from Holy Scripture courage and fortitude; in the times of the 
doctors aptitude both to learn and teach, the illumination of 
wisdom, floods of eloquence ; in the ages of heresy, confirmation 
of faith, whereby errors were plucked up : in prosperity she 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


EXCELLENCE AND MAJESTY OF THE GOSPELS. 


vii 


learns from Holy Scripture humility and modesty, in adversity 
greatness of soul. Lastly, if at any time in all the gliding years 
the Church be deformed by the wrinkles of old age, by spots, or 
blemishes, it is from the Scriptures she derives correction of 
morals, and a return to her primitive state of virtue and dignity. 

Now, of all the Divine writings, the Gospel is the most excel- 
lent, says S. Augustine ( de Consent. Evan. c. i). “ For that 

which the Law and the Prophets foretold was to be is shown in 
the Gospel to be accomplished. Prophecy is the Gospel veiled 
as the Gospel is prophecy unveiled.'' Hear S. Ambrose : “ It is 
the Gospel by which the martyr ascends to heaven. The Gospel 
is the sea in which the Apostles fish : wherein the net is cast to 
which the kingdom of heaven is like. The Gospel is the sea in 
which the mysteries of Christ are figured. The Gospel is the 
sea in which the Hebrews were saved, the Egyptians drowned. 
The Gospel is the sea, wherein is the plentitude of Divine grace, 
wherein is the Spouse of Christ, which has been founded upon the 
seas, as the prophet hath said, ‘He hath founded it upon the 
seas.' " 

Christ cries aloud, “I am the Light of the World," for by 
means of the Light of the Gospel which I spread abroad, I illu- 
minate the whole world. The Gospel, therefore, is the Light of 
the world, and its Sun. This is why, when it is read, candles are 
lighted. This was an ancient custom even in the time of Jerome, 
as he shows in his work against Vigilantius: “In all the Eastern 
churches when the Gospel is read, lights are kindled, even when 
the sun is shining, not for the purpose of banishing darkness, but 
as a mark of joy. Whence also the virgins in the parable always 
had their lamps burning, that under the figure of corporeal 
light there might be set forth the light of which we read in the 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



viii 


GENERAL PREFACE, 


Psalter, * Thy word, O Lord, is a light unto my feet, and a lantern 
onto my paths .' 99 

This is why there has ever been, not only by the Saints but by 
all Christians, wonderful reverence paid to the Gospel, wonderful 
love, wonderful veneration. Constantine the Great sent a book 
of the Gospels, adorned with gold and precious stones, to S. 
Nicholas, Bishop of Myra. The Emperor Theodosius wrote the 
Gospels with his own hand, and was wont to read them a good 
part of the night. The (Ecumenical Councils of Nicaea, Chalcedon, 
and Ephesus, caused a volume containing the Gospels to be placed 
in the midst of their house of assembly, that to it, as to the Person 
of Christ, they might turn, as though Christ Himself were saying 
to them, “Judge righteous judgment." (S. Cyril, in Apology Even 
the heretics, who have expunged some books of Holy Scrip- 
ture from the Canon, mutilated and depraved others, have not 
dared to meddle with the Gospels. Even heathens have respected 
the Gospels. How high an opinion the Platonists had of them S. 
Austin relates, de Civit. Dei, io. 29. And in his Confessions he 
says, that in a certain Platonic book he had found the first words 
of S. John's Gospel, “ In the beginning was the Word," but not 
the sentence, “The Word was made flesh." In fine, the devils 
tremble at beholding the Book of the Gospels ; and S. Chryso- 
stom says, they dare not enter the place in which it is kept. 
(Horn. 31 in Joan.) 

Christ has wrought many miracles by means of the Gospels. 
Hear a few out of many. Gregory of Tours relates that when a 
certain city was in a state of conflagration S. Gall entered the 
church, and prayed for a long time before the altar. He then 
rose and took the Book of the Gospels, and placed himself in front 
of the fire, which was immediately extinguished. Zonaras also. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



EXCELLENCE AND MAJESTY OF THE GOSPELS, 


IX 


fn his Life of Basil the Macedonian, relates that the Russians 
were converted by seeing a book of the Gospels preserved un- 
injured in the flames. 

The Holy Gospels claim the surpassing dignity which they 
hold, as well on account of their subject as because of their 
Author. Their subject is God Himself as God and Man. That 
is to say, the Gospels relate the deeds and the words of Christ the 
Lord, by means of which He has redeemed us, and taught both 
what we should believe, and what we should do, that we may 
arrive at eternal life. Therefore Christ in the Gospels deals with 
the divine precepts and counsels, with the perfection of Christian 
life. He speaks of the Sacraments, of faith, hope, and charity, of 
the Trinity, and indeed of the whole matter with which theology 
is conversant. You might, with S. Jerome, give this defi- 
nition of the Gospels: “A Breviary and Compendium of all 
Theology." 

The Author, and as we might call Him, the Choragus in the 
Evangelical Drama, who is the chief, almost the sole actor and 
speaker, is Christ the Lord. “ God," says the Apostle to the 
Hebrews, “who at sundry times, and in divers manners spake in 
time past unto the fathers by the prophets, hath in these last days 
spoken unto us by His Son, whom He hath appointed heir of all 
things* by whom also He made the worlds." Therefore not 
Moses, nor prophets, nor kings, but the Only-Begotten One, who 
from the mind of the Father hath drawn the secrets of the Divine 
Wisdom, and the very uncreated Wisdom itself, hath made the 
same known unto us in the Gospels. The very omniscient Word, 
I say, here speaks to us with His own mouth, and declares the 
mysteries kept secret from eternity, though shadowed forth by so 
many figures in the Law and the Prophets. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


X 


GENERAL PREFACE. 


This is another way by which the Gospels vindicate for them- 
selves the dignity which is due to them. They have been so 
formed by the Holy Ghost that those who are simple and un- 
learned should not be without profit in reading them, whilst great 
and lofty intellects may discover many things both difficult and 
obscure in which they may find exercise for their highest powers. 
"The Divine Word," says S. Gregory ( Prefat . in Job , c. 4), 
"exercises by its mysteries those who are prudent; and comforts 
the simple, for the most part, by what appears on its surface. It has 
openly wherewith to nourish the little ones: it preserves in secret 
things whereby it may fill with admiration the minds of the lofty. 
It is, if I may so say, a river which is both shallow and deep : in 
which a lamb may wade, and an elephant may swim." For 
indeed the doctrine of Christ is easy and accessible both to the 
lowly and the learned : it is only difficult and inaccessible to those 
who are proud, or slothful, or have confidence in themselves. “ I 
give thanks unto Thee, O Father," saith Christ, "because Thou 
hast hid these' things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed 
them unto babes : even so, Father, because it hath seemed good 
in Thy sight." 

These and many other such like things you will clearly per 
ceive, if you compare the Law with the Gospel. Under the Law 
I include the Prophets, and all the other books of the Old 
Testament: under the Gospel, the rest of the New Testament. 
The Gospels are, as it wftre, their base and centre. As the sun 
shines resplendent in the midst of the planets; and as they 
borrow their light from him, and circle around him, and move, 
as I may say, in a kind of choric dance, so is the Gospel 
refulgent like the sun amongst the writings of the Apostles, and 
imparts to them its own light and splendour. For what else are 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



EXCELLENCE AND MAJESTY OF THE GOSPELS* 


xi 


Peter, Paul, James, John, and Jude than preachers and interpreters 
of the Gospel ? “ Paul,” says S. Jerome (Epist. 61, ad Pammach .), 
“is the Gospel trumpet, the roaring of our lion, the flood of 
Christian eloquence.” Thus the Acts of the Apostles set forth 
Gospel practice; the Epistles of S. Paul and the other Apostles, 
Gospel doctrine ; the Apocalypse, prophecy. For what Christ 
foretold concerning Elias, Antichrist, the Judgment, and the end 
of the world, and the signs which shall go before it, John, in the 
Apocalypse, relates and unfolds more at length. Christ in the 
Gospel is^ as it were, the Supreme Lawgiver, Apostle, Evangelist, 
and Doctor. He likewise is the Divine Seer and Prophet. 

Christ Himself is the true Author of the Gospel. For this very 
cause He clothed His Godhead with our flesh, that by means of 
it, He might dictate the GospeJ with His own mouth. “ For,” as 
S. John says, “ The Law was given by Moses, but grace and 
truth came by Jesus Christ” What then is the Gospel ? It is the 
Book of Christ, the Philosophy of Christ, the Theology of Christ ; 
it is the most joyful message of Christ concerning redemption, and 
the everlasting salvation of the human race, brought by Himself 
from heaven, and conferred upon believers in Him. For Christ 
spake far more sublime and divine things by His own mouth than 
He spake by Moses and the Prophets. 

To read, then, or to hear the Gospel, is to read or to hear the 
Very words of the Son of God. And thus the Gospel must be 
listened to with the self-same reverence as if we were listening to 
Christ Himself. And this is what we read S. Anthony, S. Basil, 
S. Francis, and other saints did. “ Let us hearken to the Gospel,” 
saith S. Austin, “as to the Lord : the Lord is above, but here, 
too, is the Lord, the Truth.” This is why, when the Gospel is 
read in church, all stand up, as venerating Christ. This custom 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


xii 


GENERAL PREFACE. 


has Apostolic sanction. Hear S. Clement (in book 2 of the 
Apostolic Constitutions , c. 61), “ When the Gospel is read, let all the 
presbyters, deacons, and laity stand up, and keep perfect silence." 
Isidore of Pelusium shows that the same custom should also be 
observed by bishops : "When the True Pastor himself approaches, 
by opening the adorable Gospels, then at last the bishop rises, by 
this signifying that the Lord Himself is the Prince of the pastoral 
office, and that God his Master is present." (Lib. I Epist. 136.) 
Sozomen condemns the Alexandrine custom, by which, contrary 
to the general usage of the Church, the bishop does not rise when 
the Gospels are read. (Lib. 9, c. 39.) Moreover, the Eighth 
General Council (Act. 10. Can.) decrees that equal honour shall 
be paid to the Gospels as to the Cross of Christ : " We decree 
that the sacred image of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Saviour of 
all, shall be reverenced with the same honour as the book of the 
Holy Gospels. For like as by the words which are contained in 
the Book all attain to salvation, so by depicting in colours, both 
wise men as well as the unlearned receive profit from that which 
is before their eyes. For that which is in syllables are the words 
of Scripture, and they are preached and commended to us by 
pictures." 

A second reason for the superiority of the Gospel over the Law 
is found in the surpassing excellence of its doctrine. The doctrine 
of the Gospel greatly excels that which is found in the Law. The 
Law declares that one God is to be believed in and worshipped. 
The Gospel preaches of God, One in Essence, but Three in Person, 
who is to be loved and worshipped. " Go and teach all nations, 
baptizing them in the nam* of the Father, and of the Son, and of 
the Holy Ghost." I allow that in the Law and the Prophets 
there was a foreshadowing of the mystery of the Trinity. And it 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



EXCELLENCE AND MAJESTY OF THE GOSPELS. xHI 

was from thence that Trismegistus drew his oracular saying, 

M Monad begat Monad, and reflected back his warmth upon Him- 
self.” But he neither understood nor penetrated the truth of the 
mystery. This, too, the Platonists followed after, but they did not . 
attain unto it They corrupted the truth by an error similar to 
Arianism, for whilst they proclaimed one chief God, they held that 
there were lesser and inferior gods. The prophets darkly and 
obscurely foretell the birth, life, cross, passion, and ascension of 
Christ, the mission of the Holy Ghost, the calling and conversion 
of all nations ; but the Gospel firmly and clearly announces these 
things. The foreknowledge, providence, predestination, omni- 
potence, infinite love of God, and all His other attributes, are 
openly and distinctly set forth, not by the Law, but by the Gospel. 
“ No one,” saith S. John, “ hath seen God at any time : the Only* 
Begotten, who is in the bosom of the Father, He hath declared 
Him.” Therefore, when Christ was made man, He descended 
from the bosom of His Father into the bosom of His Mother, that 
He might declare unto us the secrets of the Father, which were 
known to Himself alone. This, in truth, is “ the great mystery of 
godliness," which, as the Apostle says, "was manifested in the 
flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of angels, preached unto the 
Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory." This 
verily is not in the Law, but in the Gospel. 

S. Anthony, as Anastasius testifies in his Life, called the Gospel 
“ a Letter of God sent down from heaven," teaching how we 
ought to journey towards heaven, how we ought to please God, 
and live a good and perfect life. Excellently saith S. Bernard 
(Serm. i, on the Seven Loaves'), “ The Gospel is the mirror of truth; 
it flatters no one, it misleads no one ; in it every one will find 
himself just what he is, so that he need not fear where there is no 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


xiv 


GENERAL PREFACE. 


cause for fear, nor yet rejoice when he hath done evil.” S. Gregory 
uses the same metaphor (lib. 2 Mor . c. 1), "Sacred Scripture is 
placed before the eyes of the mind, as it were a mirror, that in it 
we may behold our inward face; in it we can behold our 
deformity and our beauty ; there we discern how we have pro- 
fited, there how far we have been from profiting." With this 
S. Ambrose agrees, saying (Serm. 20 in Ps . 1 19), “ The Gospel not 
only teaches the faith, it is the school of morals, the mirror of 
conversation." 

Let us admire the sentiment of S. Bernard, who does not hesitate 
to say ( Serm . 1 in Sep.) that he who hears, reads, meditates upon 
the word of God with profit, hath a sign and a pledge of his pre- 
destination ; and, that you may not be astonished, he adds the 
reason : “ He that is of God," saith the Truth, “ heareth the 
words of God. Ye, therefore, hear them because ye are of God." 
Thus S. Cecilia, the glory of Rome, the princess of virgins, the 
standard-bearer of the martyrs, always carried the Gospel of Christ 
in her bosom, which neither flame, nor sword, nor torments were 
able to wrest from her; but by it she not only won for herself the 
laurels of virginity and martyrdom, but instructed and prepared 
her betrothed, Valerian, and her brother, Tiburtius, and many 
more, for the same laurels ; so that deservedly does the Church 
sing of her, “ Thine handmaid, Lord, Cecilia, like unto an indus- 
trious bee, doth Thee service." 

Lastly, the Law made no Apostles, but the Gospel hath made 
very many. For "the word of God is quick and powerful, 
sharper than any two-edged sword, reaching even to the dividing 
asunder of soul and spirit, of the joints and marrow, and is a dis- 
cernerof the thoughts and intents of the heart." For the Gospel 
has this force, that it causes him who believes in it to engage 


Digitized by C^ooQle 



EXCELLENCE AND MAJESTY OP THE GOSPELS* XV 

in propagating it, and so makes him a herald and preacher 
of it 

S. Chrysanthus, who empurpled Rome by a copious stream of 
his own and his relations’ blood, being converted to Christ from 
heathenism by reading the Gospel, afterwards converted his wife, 
Daria ; and after that he drew men, and Daria women, without 
number, to faith and chastity. 

S. Boniface, the Apostle of Germany, when he was propagating 
the faith of Christ in Germany, about the year a.d. 750, always 
carried about with him the sacred volume of the Gospels. Even 
in his martyrdom he did not let it go, but when the Frisons 
brandished their swords above his head he opposed this book as 
a sort of spiritual shield ; and by a remarkable miracle, although 
the book was cut right in twain by a sharp sword, not a single 
letter was destroyed. S. Dominic, that illustrious torch of the 
Church, the Father of the Friars Preachers, had the Gospel of S. 
Matthew for his constant companion. He knew almost the whole 
of it by heart, and was wont to say, 44 Without Holy Scripture a 
preacher cannot exist.” Rightly does S. Gregory, upon those 
words of Job, 44 Silver has the beginnings of its own veins,” say, 
44 Silver is the brightness of eloquence, or wisdom. The veins of 
Holy Scripture are as if any one should say plainly, it is necessary 
that he who prepares himself for the words of true preaching 
should derive their sources from the sacred pages, that whatsoever 
he speaks he should recall to the foundation of Divine authority, 
and make firm the edifice of his discourse upon that.” When 
Ven. Bede was dying, almost with his last breath he would 
finish his translation of S. John’s Gospel, and said to his scribe, 
44 Take your pen, and write quickly.” Then when the last words 

were written, like a dying swan, he sang, 44 Glory be to the Father 

b 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



xvt 


GENERAL PREFACE. 


and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost/' and most calmly breathed 
out his spirit to enjoy the reward of his faith and labours in the 
Beatific Vision of God, a.d. 731. The Emperor Charles, truly the 
Great, both in body and in the glory of sacred literature, as well 
as for his actions* a little before his death, after the coronation of 
his son Louis, gave himself up entirely to prayer, almsdeeds, 
and learning. He himself carefully revised the Four Gospels in 
conformity with their Greek and Syriac originals. Thus he spent 
his time until his last conflict. His Book of the Gospels is 
religiously preserved at Aix-la-Chapelle, as I myself have seen. 
The heretics have been imitators of these things. It is well known 
of one, Philip Melancthon, that he never went anywhere, never 
sat down, nor supped, nor dined, without having the Gospels by 
his side. But, leaving the sectaries, let us return to the Apostles. 
S. Barnabas was with S. Paul, the first Apostle of the Gentiles. 
When he was going forth to convert them he wrote out the Gospel 
of S. Matthew, and carried it about with him wherever he went. 
At length, dying a martyr for the Gospel in Cyprus, he desired to 
be buried with it, as a pledge of the heavenly resurrection pro- 
mised to him. This very Gospel of S. Matthew was found upon 
his breast in the time of the Emperor Zeno. See his Life. The 
Apostle Bartholomew, as Eusebius tells us (&. E. v. 10), took 
with him to the Indies the Gospel of S. Matthew in Hebrew, 
written with his own hand. There he left it, and more than a 
hundred years afterwards Pantaenus found it, and brought it to 
Alexandria. What turned Saul into Paul ? The Gospel. “These 
were the men," says S. Leo ( Serm . 1 on SS. Peter and Paul), “ by 
whom the Gospel shone upon thee, O Rome. They delivered to 
thee, as a charge to keep, that Gospel which Christ had committed 
unto them : they sealed it with their blood, that thou shouldst 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



EXCELLENCE AND MAJESTY OF THE GOSPELS. XVU 

keep it pure, and deliver it, and expound it to all the other Churches 
as a mistress of truth. This is what Paul proclaims aloud to thee 
in his Epistle: ‘That I may be the minister of Christ to the 
Gentiles, sanctifying (Gr. Upavpy owto, that is, consecrating) 
the Gospel of God, that the oblation of the Gentiles may be 
accepted and sanctified by the Holy Ghost/ " The Gospel, and 
the preaching and interpretation of the Gospel, is the sacrifice ; 
the Romans and the Gentiles who believe the Gospel are the 
victims. These the Apostle offered to God as a most acceptable 
oblation, when he evangelized them. The blood of Paul was the 
libation by which this sacrifice was bedewed. 

The same S. Paul says in his Epistle to the Ephesians, “Unto 
me, who am less than the least of all saints, is this grace given, 
that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches 
of Christ: and to make all men see what is the fellowship of 
the mystery, which from the beginning of the world hath been 
hid in God, who created all things by Jesus Christ: to the 
intent that now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly 
places might be known, by the church, the manifold wisdom of 
God." 

Paul, therefore, was the doctor of angels. S. Chrysostom 
commenting on the passage says, he taught the principalities and 
powers the Gospel of Christ They, therefore, are followers of 
Paul, and co-workers with him who handle and expound the 
Gospel, and preach it to countrymen and foreigners, to believers 
and infidels. These are they whom Isaiah deservedly praises, 
“ How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of them that 
preach the Gospel of peace, who bring glad tidings of good 
things." 

It remains that we should apply the doctrines of the Gospel to 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


xviii 


GENERAL PREFACE. 


our own lives and those of others. For the Gospel is a mirror 
in which every one may behold his own face. “ The Life of 
Christ/' says S. Bernard, “is the rule by which I ought to frame 
my life/' Christ is Alpha and Omega, the First and the Last. 
“The First," says S. Austin, “in eternity, the Last by humility/* 

✓ Let us learn then from the Evangel to live evangelically, 
that is, angelically. For Christ as an Angel descended from 
heaven that He might teach men angelic life and doctrine, yea, 
that of men He might make angels, and in a certain sense, gods. 
“ Behold, I," saith He by the Prophet Malachi, “ send My Angel, 
and He shall prepare the way before My face : and the Lord 
whom ye seek shall straightway come to His temple, even the 
Angel of the Covenant, whom ye delight in." 

Wherefore from Him, who is the Eternal Wisdom of the 
Father, we must diligently ask light and the grace of His Spirit, 
that He who sat in the midst of the Doctors when He was about 
to make a commencement of the Gospel, would even now open it 
both to teachers and taught, that they may understand it, and 
fulfil their understanding of it by Christian works. 

Let us say therefore again and again with S. Augustine, if not 
with equal, yet with similar fervour (lib. 4 de Trinit . c. 1), “In 
this sort of men, who have sorrow in their pilgrimage, because 
they long for the country, and for God the Founder of it, in this 
family of Thy Christ, O my God, among Thy poor I groan ; give 
me of thy Bread to answer men, who neither hunger nor thirst 
after justice, but are full and abound. For their own fancy, not 
Thy Truth hath satisfied them, for they repel Thy Truth and kick 
against it, that they may fall in their own vanity. Clearly do I 
perceive how many figments the heart of man brings forth. And 
what is my heart but the heart of a man ? But for this I pray to 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



EXCELLENCE AND MAJESTY OF THE GOSPELS* 


xix 


the God of my heart that in these writings I may put forth none 
of those figments for solid truth, but that there may come into 
them whatever shall be able to come through me from the place 
whence the dawning of His truth breaks upon me, although I 
have been cast out of the sight of His eyes, and am striving to 
return from afar by the path which the Divine Person of His Only- 
Begotten One hath laid down for mankind/ 9 

After a litde he adds, “The essence of God is such, that It 
hath nothing mutable, neither in eternity, nor in truth, nor in 
will, because there there is eternal truth, and eternal love : and 
true charity is there^ and true eternity; there is loving eternity, 
and loving truth. 

Open unto us, O Lprd Jesus, the arcana of truth, and of Thine 
own true love, Thou that hast the key of David, who openest and 
no man shutteth, and shuttest and no man openeth, that we may 
know it clearly, and when we know it, may love and cherish it, 
and loving it, may indeed fulfil it, for Thou art our Love, Thou 
our Desire our Life, and our Blessedness. Amen. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



Digitized by L^ooQle 


OF THE NUMBER, ORDER, 


AGREEMENT AND DISCREPANCIES 

OF 

THE GOSPELS, 


V ERY many in the olden time wrote Gospels, and fathered 
them upon Apostles, giving them the names of Apostles, 
that they might in this manner gain a sanction for their 
heresies. “Thus,” says S. Jerome, “these were the authoritative 
books of divers heresies, published by divers authors, such as the 
Gospel according to the Egyptians, the Gospel of Thomas, of 
Matthias, of Bartholomew, of The Twelve Apostles, of Basilides, 
of Apelles, and others which it would be tedious to enumerate. 
This only is it needful to say, that certain men rose up, who 
without the Spirit and grace of God attempted rather to weave a 
tale than to compile historical truth. To these men may justly 
be applied the words of the Prophet, ‘Woe unto them which 
prophesy out of their own heart, and walk after their own spirit, 
who say, The Lord saith, and the Lord hath not sent them/ Of 
such the Saviour also speaks in the Gospel of S. John, ‘All that 
ever came before Me were thieves and robbers/ ” And after an 
interval he adds, “ From all these things combined, it may be 
clearly seen that four Gospels only ought to be received, and that 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


xxii 


GENERAL PREFACE. 


fall the follies of the Apocryphal Gospels have been the utterances 
of dead heretics, rather than of Catholic writers/' 

There are then only Four Canonical Gospels, and the Church 
proves them to be so by the teachi ng and tradition of the 
.Apostles. For S. Peter gave his sanction to the Gospel of 
|S. Mark, S. Paul to that of S. Luke, the Apostles unitedly to that 
of S, Matthew, for when they were about to go away to their 
several provinces they carried it with them. All the Bishops of 
Asia, and the rest of the faithful are witnesses to the Gospel of 
S. John. Orige n and S. Jerome, cite the authorities for these 
statements. As for the Gospel according to the Hebrews, attri- 
buted to S. Matthew, although it seems to have been the same 
with his Gospel, it has been depraved by additions from various 
sources, so that it is of doubtful and uncertain authority. 
S. Jerome, however, translated it out of Hebrew into Latin. This 
is what he says in his catalogue of illustrious men, speaking 
of James, the Lord's brother: “The Gospel which is called 
according to the Hebrews, I have lately translated into Greek and 
Latin. Origen frequently quotes it. It makes the following 
mention of James after the Lord's Resurrection. ‘When the 
Lord had given a linen cloth to the priest's servant, He went and 
appeared unto James. For James had sworn that he would not 
eat bread from the hour in which he had drank of the Lord's 
chalice, until he beheld Him risen from the dead.’ And again, 
* Bring forth,' saith the Lord, f bread and a table,' adding 
immediately, ‘ He took bread, and blessed it, and brake, and gave 
it unto James the Just, and saith unto him, My Brother, eat thy 
bread, for the Son of Man hath arisen from among them that 
slept.'" 

In the same work, Jerome, speaking of S. Ignatius says, 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


AGREEMENT AND DISCREPANCIES OF THE GOSPELS. 


XX11I 


* Ignatius wrote an Epistle to the Smymaeans, in which he 
quotes a passage from the Gospel which has been recently 
translated by me, upon the Person of Christ, saying, * I indeed, 
even after His Resurrection, have seen Him in the flesh, and 
I believe that He is. And when He came unto Peter, and unto 
them which were with Peter, He saith unto them, Behold Me, and 
touch Me, for I am not an incorporeal spirit And immediately 
they touched Him, and believed.' " Origen moreover (tom. 2 
in Joan.) cites from the same Gospel, "Christ hath said, Presently 
My Mother, the Holy Ghost, received Me, and carried Me by one 
of My hairs to Mount Tabor," This sentence, unless it be construed 
favourably, seems to contain the Gnostic heresy of the Valen- 
tinians, who asserted that the Holy Ghost was the Mother of 
Christ 

Origen, however, defends it thus, that the Holy Ghost is not 
called the Mother of Christ by generation, but by imitation, 
forasmuch as He imitated His Father, and conformed Himself to 
His will. This is but a poor defence however. Bede also quotes 
this Gospel, and asserts that it was allowed by the ancients. But I 
however this may be, it is certain t hat it is no t cano nical , and has | 
not the auth ority of Holy Scripture. 

This Gospel according to the Hebrews was also called the 
Gospel of the Nazarenes, because the Nazarenes made use of it 
Hear S. Jerome (in e. 12 Matth. v. 13), where he is speaking of 
Christ healing the withered hand : M In the Gospel used by the 
Nazarenes and the Ebionites, which I have recently translated out 
of Hebrew into Greek, and which is considered by many an 
authentic work of Matthew, the man who had the withered hand 
is said to have been a mason. These are the words in which he 
t cried for help. There was a certain mason who gained his living 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



xxiv 


GENERAL PREPACE* 


by the use of his hands, who cried out unto Him and said, 4 1 pray 
Thee, Jesus, that Thou wouldest restore me to soundness, that I 
may not disgracefully beg my bread. 9 9f 

The Nazarenes were Jews who were converted to Christ, who* 
because they kept the law of Moses together with the Gospel, 
were cast out of the Church. The Hebrew Gospel of S. Matthew, 
which they kept at first genuine and untampered with, they seem 
to have subsequently corrupted by certain additions, in the same 
way that the Ebionites and Carpocratians did. 

/ You may ask why there are precisely four Evangelists and four 
Gospels, neither more nor less. I. S. Augustine (lib. I de Consms . 

I Evang . c. 2) answers, because there are four quarters of the world 
in which the Gospel must be preached. 

2. “ These four are, as it were, the four pillars of the Church, 
on which as on a square stone, the sacred structure of the faith is 
built. 99 So says S. Gregory (lib. I, Epist. 24). 

3. Because the number four is solid and square. Therefore it 
denotes the solidity and perfection of the Gospels. Whence Philo 
{lib. de Mundi Opificio) says, “ The number four first shows the 
nature of a solid : for a point is reckoned in unity, a line by duality ; 
when breadth is added, superficies pertains to the number three j 
for surface to become a solid body it lacks one thing ; when this 
is added, namely height, we have the number four." Aristotle 
calls a perfect man foursquare. 

4. Others assign as the reason, that there are just so many 
» letters in the Hebrew name of God, which is called the Tetragram- 
maton, representing the four primary attributes of God, which are 
unfolded in the Gospels. Others say, because there were four 
rivers in Paradise. But these are all mystical and symbolical 
reasons. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



AGREEMENT AND DISCREPANCIES OP THE GOSPELS. 


XXV 


5. The literal and real reason is because, as there are four 
Cherubim in the court of Heaven, as it were the princes and wise 
ones of God, so in the Church on earth there are four Evangelists, 
as it were, princes and cherubim of Christ. This is plain from the 
first chapter of Ezekiel, where he represents these four Cherubim 
with four faces, as denoting the four attributes of God. Add that 
two of the Evangelists, in the beginning of their Gospels, speak of 
the two natures of Christ — Matthew of His human, John of His 
divine nature. The other two speak of the two-fold dignity of 
Christ — Mark of His royal, Luxe of His sacerdotal dignity. So 
Ruperti on the first chapter of Ezekiel. “ For Christ was a man by 
being born, a calf by dying, a lion by rising again, an eagle by 
ascending/’ says S. Jerome. That cherubic chariot then is the 
Gospel chariot, drawn, as it were, by four horses, that is to say, 
the four Evangelists, making the circuit of the world. This appli- 
cation of Ezekiel’s vision of the four Cherubim to signify the four 
Evangelists is given by SS. Jerome, Athanasius, Austin, Irenseus, 
Gregory, Ambrose, Bede, and the rest of the Fathers by a unani- 
mous consensus . 

Listen to S. Jerome (Epist. 103, ad PauUnuni ), “Matthew, Mark, 
Luke, and John are the Lord's' chariot, the true cherubim, which 
means the multitude of knowledge, whose bodies were all full of eyes, 
who gave forth sparks, ran to and fro like lightnings, had straight 
feet, and who were borne aloft ; who had their backs covered with 
wings, and who flew in all directions. They each take hold of 
one another, they are mutually intertwined, they revolve as a 
wheel within a wheel, and they proceed whithersoever the 
breathing of the Holy Spirit leadeth them.” 

Now, the cherubim of Ezekiel had four faces and four forms, 
namely, of a lion, a man, a calf, and an eagle. S* John, in the 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



xxvi 


GENERAL PREFACE* 


Apocalypse (chap, iv.), calls them four living 1 creatures. “ The first 
living creature,'* he says, “was like a lion, the second like a calf, the 
third was like a man, and the fourth like a flying eagle." 

The lion denotes S. Mark, whose face, ia, the beginning of his 
Gospel, is the cry and the roar of John the Baptist in the wilder- 
ness, “ Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand the 
calf denotes S. Luke, who commences his Gospel with the ancient 
priesthood, whose victim was a calf. The man denotes S. 
Matthew, who begins with the human genealogy of Christ. The 
eagle denotes S. John, who, soaring aloft from earth to heaven, 
balances himself like an eagle, and thunders forth, as it were, that 
Divine exordium, “ In the beginning was the Word, and the 
Word was with God, and the Word was God." Deservedly does 
S. Denis the Areopagite, in his Epistle to the same John, call him 
the sun of the Gospel, and his Gospel itself the memory and the 
renewal of that Theology, which he drew from the Lord, as 
he lay upon His breast, and left to be beheld in his Gospel by those 
who came after, like a ray of the sun. 

Listen to S. Jerome in his Preface to S. Matthew: “First of 
all is Matthew the publican, sumamed Levi, who published a 
Gospel in Judaea in the Hebrew language, chiefly for the sake of 
those from among the Jews who had believed in Jesus, but who 
still observed the shadow of the Old Law, after the truth of the 
Gospel had come in its place. The second is Mark, the inter- 
preter of the Apostle Peter, and first Bishop of the Church of 
Alexandria, who had not indeed himself seen the Lord, the 
Saviour ; but related the things which he had heard his master 
preach, rather according to the truth of what was done, than the 
order. The third is Luke the Physician, a Syrian by nation, an 
Antiochene, whose praise is in the Gospel. He was a disciple of 


Digitized by Google 



AGREEMENT AND DISCREPANCIES OP THE GOSPELS* 


xxvii 


the Apostle Paul; and composed his work in the parts of Achaia 
and Bceotia. He aimed somewhat loftily ; and as he himself 
confesses in his Preface, narrated what he had heard rather than 
what he had seen. The last is John, the Apostle and Evangelist, 
who loved Jesus very greatly, and who, lying upon the Lord's 
bosom, drank of the very purest streams of doctrine, and who 
alone was privileged to hear from the Cross, * Behold thy 
Mother/ " 

These four so appropriately wrote the words and deeds of 
Christ, that they seem to make a kind of musical harmony of 
four chords ; for what each one writes is different in style from 
the others, but agrees with them in meaning and in facts. What 
one is silent about, another supplies : what one gives concisely, 
another relates more at large : what one obscurely hints at, 
another gives at length. As S. Augustine says, “Although each 
seems to have preserved his own order in writing, yet they are 
not found to have written as though any one were ignorant of 
what had been said by him who preceded; but as each was 
inspired, he added the not superfluous co-operation of his own 
labour/' 

Lastly, the discrepancies of the Evangelists are the greatest 
possible testimony to their truthfulness. As S. Chrysostom says 
in his Preface to S. Matthew, “ If altogether and in every respect 
they exactly corresponded, and with the utmost precision with 
respect to times and places were in perfect verbal agreement, 
there is not one of our enemies but would believe, that they were 
engaged in a common design to deceive, and that they had framed 
the Gospels by human understanding, for they would not judge 
that this supposed harmony arose from simple sincerity, but was 
the result of contrivance/' And again, he says, “ If any one 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



xxviii 


GENERAL PREFACE. 


whatsoever had related everything, the others would have been 
superfluous : or if again, on the other hand, each had written 
nothing which was found in the others, there could have been no 
proof of their agreement. Wherefore they have written 
many things in common, and yet each hath related something 
specially and peculiarly his own. And thus they have escaped 
the charge of writing for writing's sake, merely to add to the 
number of the Gospels, as well as the opposite danger of bringing 
discredit upon everything, by each giving entirely different 
events.” 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



ON THE VERSIONS 


OF THB 

GOSPELS. 


T HE Syriac version of the Gospels was made, as it would 
seem, from the Greek, and is extant in the royal Bibles. 
The Arabic version was printed at Rome with a translation, at 
the Medici printing press, a.d. 1591. I frequently dte both 
these versions. 

I have also found in the Vatican Library at Rome the Coptic, 
or Egyptian version of the Gospels, the Ethiopian, and the 
Persian, all very ancient. For the Gospel was brought into 
Egypt soon after Christ byS. Mark, into Ethiopia by S. Matthew, 
into Persia by S. Simon and S. Jude. Ana so the faith of the 
Gospel flourished in those regions. In them there were swarms 
of holy monks and brave martyrs. A Persian version was 
transmitted by Jerome Xavier, the Jesuit, a cousin of S. Francis 
Xavier, from the city of Arga, in the territory of the King of 
Mogor, as a precious gift, and a remarkable monument of an- 
tiquity, to the Collegium Romanum, where I have collated it 
This Codex was transcribed from the original in the Mahometan 
year 730 of the Hegira, which corresponds to a.d. 1381. The 
original itself was very much more ancient, for which reason the 
version contains a great number of Persian words differing from 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



XXX 


GENERAL PREFACE. 


modern Persian. Of all these versions I propose to make use, 
though in moderation, and cum grano . For they have not the 
authority of the Greek and Latin Gospels ; but they confirm, and 
to some extent illustrate them. Moreover there are at Rome 
Ethiopians, or Abyssinians, whose youthful priests are in the 
habit of coming to the Collegium Romanum. In Rome too there 
are those who are skilled in other tongues, for the world is in 
that city. The various Gospels have been interpreted to me by 
men of the several nations and languages in which they are 
written, especially by the Reverend Father Athanasius Kincher 
of our Society, a man well acquainted with the Oriental languages, 
as may be seen by the Lexicon which he has lately published. 

It is said that S. Matthew preached in hither Ethiopia, now 
called Sennaar, where there are black Ethiopians. He is said to 
have died in the city of Luah, where there are still standing 
churches dedicated to him. The rest of Ethiopia, or Abyssinia, 
attributes its reception of the Gospels and the rest of Holy Scrip- 
ture, together with the faith of Christ to a certain Ethiopian monk, 
named Abba Salama, or the father of peace. He was brought up 
amongst the Eastern Arabs, from whom he derived his knowledge 
of Christianity and the Holy Scriptures, which he afterwards 
communicated to the whole of Ethiopia, for which reason he is 
called its apostle. The Ethiopic version agrees with the Arabic^ 
from which it was derived. 

Very many, both in ancient and modern times, have written 
commentaries on the Gospels. Not to multiply citations, let us 
quote what S. Jerome says in his preface to S. Matthew: “I 
confess that I have read many years ago twenty-five volumes of 
Origen upon S. Matthew, and as many volumes of Homilies. I 
have read also the commentaries of Theophilus, Bishop of Antioch, 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



VERSIONS OF THE GOSPELS* 


xxxi 


of Hippolytus the Martyr, and of Theodore of Heraclea, of 
Apollinarius of Laodicsea, and Didymus of Alexandria. Of Latin 
commentators, I have read the works of Hilary, Victorinus, and 
Fortunatus, from whom, even though little be taken, something 
worthy remembrance might be written down.” 

Of recent commentators the number is all but infinite. Their 
superabundance makes it difficult for the reader to know which 
to' choose, so that he might say with Niobe of old, “Abundance 
has made me poor.” 

For myself, I have written the following commentaries, partly 
at Louvain, a.d. 1600, partly when I was teaching and lecturing 
publicly on the Gospels at Rome. I am now an old man, and 
have passed nearly all my life in learning in the school of the 
Holy Scriptures. In a science so vast, so sublime and difficult, 
no one ought to be a teacher and doctor until he has spent long 
time in studying as a disciple of the doctors. 


c 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



ON THE TITLE 


PREFIXED TO 

SAINT MATTHEW’S GOSPEL* 


T HIS Gospel in the Latin, Greek, and Syriac versions, has for 
its title, “ The Holy Gospel of Jesus Christ according to 
Matthew/' That is, this is the book which contains the most 
excellent and joyful message of the advent of Christ, the Messiah 
promised to the patriarchs, of His Incarnation, Birth, Life, Preach- 
ing, Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension, of the grace of His 
salvation, and the glory flowing from it and given to the whole 
world, of which things S. Matthew was the writer, the Holy Ghost 
the dictator. 

The Syriac version prefixes the following title: “In power of 
the Lord, and of our God, Jescua Christ, we begin to write the book 
of the most sacred Evangel, the first Gospel, the preaching of 
Matthew/' At the end of the book is written, “Of die holy 
Gospel, the preaching of Matthew, which he preached in the 
Hebrew tongue, in the land of Palestine, the end/' The Arabic 
has, “The Gospel of Jesus Christ, as Mar (ia, lord) Matthew, 
one of His twelve disciples, wrote it/' 

Holy : The Gospel both is, and is called holy, because all the 
things which it contains are pre-eminently holy; viz., holy is the 
Birth of Christ, holy is His doctrine, holy are His works. There 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



TITLE PREFIXED TO S. MATTHEW* S GOSPEL. 


xxxiii 


is also an allusion to Daniel ix. 24, where it is said that seventy 
weeks of years must be fulfilled until Christ, that the Holy of 
Holies may be anointed, because it is shown in this Gospel that 
the prophecy of Daniel was fulfilled in Christ which was for to 
come. For Christ is the Holy of Holies, and therefore as of old 
to the patriarch Jacob, so now to all Christians, His servants, He 
will give knowledge of holy things; ” for His object is our sancti- 
fication, that “we may serve Him in holiness and righteousness 
all the days of our life." (Luke i. 75.) 

Gospel, in Greek Evangel, good news, from cfayyAAo, I bring 
good news. So S. Chrysostom. See Budseus, in Pandectas, where 
he adds that Evangel, by metonyme, signifies a donation, or an 
offering given for good news. Thus Cicero writes to Atticus, 
“O, thy sweet letters, for which I confess I owe cvangelia!" that is, 
a reward for good tidings. In Hebrew, Gospel is called besorah , 
from basar, "flesh," because besorah is the most joyful tidings of the 
Word " being made flesh." 

According to Matthew. The words, according to, denote that 
primarily and chiefly its author is the Holy Spirit, and in the 
second place S. Matthew. For Matthew was as it were the 
organ, instrument, and pen of the Holy Spirit, writing the things 
which the Holy Ghost dictated to him, according to those words 
in the forty-fifth Psalm, "My tongue is the pen of a ready writer." 

2. According to denotes that the Gospel is one and the same, but 
was written in a fourfold manner by four Evangelists. Therefore 
the words indicate that the Gospel of S. Matthew is not another 
Gospel than that of SS. Mark, Luke, and John, but only that there 
was a different writer, and a different manner of writing the Gospel. 

3. It signifies that the Holy Ghost accommodated Himself to 
the nature and disposition of S. Matthew. The Holy Ghost illu- 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



xxxiv 


GENERAL PREFACE. 


minated, stirred him up, and directed him, so as to write the 
things which he had partly witnessed himself, partly had heard 
from the other Apostles, and partly God had revealed to him, in 
such a way as should be in accordance with the method, order, 
style, diction, and genius of S. Matthew. For there was no need 
of a fresh revelation from God for such things as Matthew already 
knew, by seeing or hearing them, but only of assistance and 
direction of the Holy Spirit, lest through forgetfulness, or any 
other human infirmity, he should err from the truth, even in the 
very slightest point, or write anything else, or in any different 
manner from what the Holy Spirit willed. 

Some are of opinion that this title was prefixed to his Gospel 
by S. Matthew himself, as were also the titles of S. Mark, S. Luke, 
and S. John by those Evangelists. For thus the Prophets pre- 
fixed their names to their prophecies, as the Vision of Isaiah, the 
Vision of Obadiah. 

But it is far more probable that the titles of each of the Gospels 
were attached to them, not by the Evangelists themselves, but by 
the Church. The similarity of the titles is an indication that such 
was the case. The title of the Syriac Gospel, which I have already 
cited, makes it still more probable that it was so. And from hence 
you may gather an irrefragable argument for the authority of 
tradition, that Holy Scripture does not suffice for building up the 
true faith and morals of the Church, but that there is need like- 
wise of Apostolic traditions. This is one of the false negations of 
the heretics. For tell me if you can, from whence you know that 
this is the Gospel of S. Matthew, and Canonical Scripture, and that 
the Gospels of Thomas, of Barnabas, and the Twelve Apostles, 
which were formerly in circulation, are not Canonical Scripture, 
except by the tradition and consent of the Church? For many 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



TITLE PREFIXED TO 5* MATTHEW’S GOSPEL. 


XXXV 


books have false titles, and are inscribed with the names of other 
authors, as is plain by the works of SS. Augustine, Jerome, 
Cyprian, and other Fathers. In the same way some Gospels 
which were compiled by heretics, were inscribed with the names 
of SS. Bartholomew, Thomas, and Barnabas. By like art and 
deceit, they might have ascribed a false Gospel to S. Matthew, 
as in effect the Gnostics did, when they changed and corrupted S. 
Matthew's Gospel by their additions. In order, therefore^ that we 
may be sure that this Gospel is rightly ascribed to S. Matthew, 
and still more, that the whole of it was really dictated by the 
Holy Ghost, there must needs be the declaration and definition of 
the Church, which severs it from Apocryphal writings, and pro- 
nounces it Canonical. Hence S. Austin, in his book against the 
Epistle of Manes, which they call Fundamental , wisely says, “ I 
would not believe the Gospel, unless the authority of me Catholic 
Church moved me to do so.” Not because the authority of the 
Church is worthier, or of more weight than that of Holy Scripture 
— for Scripture is the word and the oracle of God Himself— but 
because it is the office of the Church to separate genuine Scripture 
from what is false and spurious, and to give its true sense and 
meaning. " When, therefore, we say,” says a weighty author, 
“ that the Evangelists and other sacred writers have authority 
from the Catholic Church, according to the sense in which we say 
it, no one has a right to be offended, as if we set the Church 
before God. For the sense in which we say that the Church 
confers authority upon the Scriptures is this, that she declares 
them to be given by God, and pronounces that they have been 
dictated by Him. Do they prefer the servant to his master, who 
say. as is commonly done, that the king’s letters have the chan- 
cellor's authority, because he has attached the great seal to them? 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


xxx vi 


GENERAL PREFACE. 


But the Church has the Seal of God, even the Spirit Himself, who 
was promised, and has been given to her, that He may abide with 
her for ever. The Spirit recognizes His own handwriting. He it 
was who first dictated these four Gospels, And now He makes 
known to us, by the Church, that He did indite them. 

Matthew. Matthew, who was called by Christ from the receipt 
of custom to the apostolate, was the first who wrote a Gospel. 
Blessed Peter Damian, in his sermon on S. Matthew, gives him 
this eulogium: — “Amongst the greatest saints who have gained 
their titles of victory in celestial glory by their triumph over the 
world, Matthew seems to me especially glorious and famous, and 
to obtain a certain primacy of dignity amongst them. To speak 
plainly, there is no one after Christ to whom, as it appears to me, 
the holy universal Church is more indebted. For this is the very 
cause of the life of the world, that the Gospel has shone upon us. 
Like a captain, he carried a standard for his followers, and by his 
example stirred them up to write. 

Cajetan and the Anabaptists are of opinion that S. Matthew 
wrote in Greek, because Hebrew words — such as Emmanuel ; Eli f 
Elt, lama sabachtham ? — are translated into Greek. But these 
may have been added by the Greek translator. SS. Jerome and 
Augustine, Eusebius, and the rest of the ancients, unanimously 
affirm that Matthew wrote in Hebrew, and that he did so because 
he was asked by the Jews, when he was going away amongst the 
Gentiles, to leave them in writing what he had orally preached 
to them. This is asserted by S. Chrysostom, in his first Homily, 
The Auctor Imperfecti adds, “The cause of S. Matthew's writing 
was this : at a time of severe persecution in Palestine, when all 
were in danger of being dispersed, in order that if the disciples 
were deprived oi teachers of the faith, they might not be deprived 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


TITLE PREFIXED TO S. MATTHEW'S GOSPEL. 


xxxvii 


of teaching, they asked Matthew to write them a history of all the 
words and deeds of Christ, that wheresoever they might be, they 
might have with them a statement of all that they believed. S. 
Jerome declares that he had seen S. Matthew's Gospel, written in 
Hebrew, in the Library of Pamphilus the Martyr, at Caesarea, and 
from it had transcribed his own copy. This Hebrew text is now, 
however, lost. For what Sebastian Munster, an unfrocked rene- 
gade, has offered to us, as though he had received it from the 
Jews, is suspected to have been written, or else falsified, by 
heretics or Jewish traitors, and has besides an offensive odour of 
spuriousness. 

S. Matthew wrote a Gospel in Hebrew, at the bidding of the 
Apostles, says S. Epiphanius {Hares. 51), in the same year that 
they took counsel about separating, that they might go to the 
Gentiles. This was in the year 37 after the birth of Christ, the 
fourth from the Passion. So that the opinion of Baronius is not 
so probable that Matthew wrote in a.d. 41. Still less probable 
is what S. Irenaeus says (lib. 3, c. 1), that he wrote whilst SS. Peter 
and Paul were preaching at Rome. For S. Peter did not come to 
Rome before the second year of the Emperor Claudius, and 
S. Paul not before the third year of Nero. Whence it would follow 
that S. Matthew did not write until the eighteenth or twentieth 
year after Christ's ascension, which is evidently untrue. 

Certainly S. Matthew’s Hebrew Gospel was immediately trans- 
lated into Greek. This was done either by S. Matthew himself, 
S. John, or S. James, or by some such person. S. Athanasius, in 
his Synopsis of Holy Scripture , says, “ Matthew's Gospel was 
written by Matthew in the Hebrew dialect, published at Jerusalem, 
and a translation made by James, the Lord's brother/* But 
Theophylact, in his Preface says, “John, it is reported, translated 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


xxxviii 


GENERAL PREFACE. 


this Gospel out of Hebrew into Greek.” Some again are of 
opinion that Barnabas was the translator of this Gospel from 
Hebrew into Greek. Among others this is asserted by Sixtus 
Senensis. But Anastasius Sinaita says that Luke and Paul were 
the translators. The Syriac version of S. Matthew was certainly 
translated not from the Hebrew, but the Greek. S. Jerome also, 
when by the command of Pope Damasus, he corrected the Latin 
translation of the four Gospels, made S. Matthew conform to the 
Greek rather than the Hebrew, as he tells us in his preface to the 
Gospels. I may observe in passing that when S. Jerome, at the bid- 
ding of Damasus, translated the Old Testament out of Hebrew into 
Latin, he did not translate afresh the New Testament, but brought 
the existing translation into accordance with the Greek original. 

So that the translator of the New Testament was not S. Jerome, 
but some one much earlier, though far from being a good Latinist, 
as is plain to every reader. 

S. Jerome says, that when S. Matthew wrote his Gospel in 
Hebrew, he appears to have followed the Hebrew original in his 
citations from the Old Testament. But the Greek translator has 
preferred to cite them from the Septuagint, as better known to 
the Gentiles. 

Whether S. Matthew wrote in pure Hebrew, such as that of 
Moses and the Prophets, or in the corrupt Hebrew current after 
the Babylonish captivity, usually called Syriac, is not plain. It is 
certain that the Jews in the time of Christ did not speak pure 
Hebrew. Syriac was their vernacular. It is very evident that the 
rest of the New Testament was translated from Greek into Syriac, 
and the same person apparently translated all the books. The 
Hebrew words quoted in the Greek text differ from the Syriac words 
used in the Syriac version now extant. 


Digitized by 


Google 




TITLE PREFIXED TO S. MATTHEW’S GOSPEL. 


XXXIX 


In S. Matthew xxvii. 8, instead of the Hebrew Haceldama , or field 
of blood, the present Syriac has agurescadama , an evident Grecism, 
partly formed from aypos, a field. Instead of the Hebrew Cephas , the 
Syriac has Kypho. For Eli, Eli , my God, my God, it has II, II, omit- 
ting* the my. For Golgota, it has Golgoulto ; for Jacob, Jaacaub, &c. 

The Syrians thought that the translator of the New Testament 
from Greek into their language was S. Mark the Evangelist. But it 
is difficult to believe this, for both the Cyrils, Clement of Alexan- 
dria, SS. Athanasius and Damascene, Theodoret, S. Ephrem, who 
lived either in Syria, or else in Egypt, make no mention of it. I 
may add that the Version has several things which are little 
pleasing to learned men. This translator appears to have lived 
subsequently to the Fathers just named. He has this good point 
about him, however, that he was a Catholic opposed to heretics. 
For in the headings of his chapters he often makes mention of 
fasts, vigils, feasts, invocation of saints, &c. 

As regards divisions, the Gospel of S. Matthew has been 
variously divided, and parted into sections. By the ancient Latin 
Church, according to S. Hilary, it was divided into 33 Canons : 
by others, it was divided into 67 Canons. By the later Latins it 
is divided into 28 chapters. By the Greeks, according to Euthy- 
mius, it was divided into 68 chapters; according to Suidas into 
68 titles, and 355 chapters. 

Lastly, S. Matthew is pre-eminent amongst the Evangelists in 
the following respects : — 

1. He was the first who published a Gospel, wherefore Ter- 
tullian calls him, “that most faithful exponent of the Gospel.” 
(Lib. de Came Ckristi, c. 22.) 

2 . Because he dwells upon Christ’s regal dignity more than the 
others. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



xl 


GENERAL PREFACE. 


3. Because S. Matthew was the Apostle of Ethiopia, and the 
victim of virginity. He was slain by King Hirtacus, because he 
was not willing that Iphigenia, the daughter of the King of 
Ethiopia, who had consecrated her virginity to God, should be 
given him to wife. 

4. Because S. Matthew, who was perfectly conversant with 
business affairs, for he was over the tribute, was converted 
to Christ, not by seeing His miracles, not by hearing His 
preaching, says S. Chrysostom, but by a single word, “ Follow 
Me,” obeying this with the utmost promptitude, he was straight- 
way changed into another man, even into an Ajxjstle, so that he 
left all things, and followed Christ I may add, that after this he 
never left Christ, but was a beholder and a witness of His miracles* 
an imitator of His life, a companion of His journeys and labours 
a partaker of His cares and griefs, and thus was conversant with 
Him during the whole period of His earthly ministry. 

Matthew means in Hebrew, given, as Origen and Isidore 
say — or a gift, as Pagninus thinks — from matthan, a gift. Ana- 
stasius oi Antioch gives a different interpretation, Matthew, he 
says, means the " command of the Most High.” S. Gregory 
makes the following remarks about him: “Iron is taken out 
of the earth. Was not Matthew found in the earth, when he was 
immersed in worldly business, and served the customs 9 board. 
But when he was taken out of the earth, he possessed the strength 
of iron. For by his tongue, and by the dispensation of the Gospel 
committed to him, the Lord, as by a most sharp sword, transfixed 
the hearts of unbelievers.” Clement of Alexandria says of this 
Evangelist, that he was not wont to eat flesh, but to live on seeds, 
berries, and herbs. 

I pass over what Abdias (lib. 3 Hist . Apost. ) says, that Matthew 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



TITLE PREFIXED TO S. MATTHEW* S GOSPEL. 


xli 


on account of the Gospel which he was preaching to the 
Myrmidons, had his eyes put out by those idolaters, but was 
restored to sight by the Apostle S. Andrew, at the bidding of an 
angel, who appeared to him, with many other things, for this 
Abdias is an apocryphal writer. You may consult Surius, 
Baronius, John de le Haye, and several other writers for further 
particulars about S. Matthew. 

The last thing I will mention is, that S. Matthew made himself 
known to S. Brigitt, when she was praying at his tomb in the city 
of Malphi, and said to her, “ When I was writing my Gospel, so 
intense was the heat of the Divine flame which abode with me, 
that even if I had wished to keep silence, I could not, because of that 
burning heat. 9 * 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



SAINT MATTHEW’S GOSPEL. 


CHAPTER L 

I The genealogy of Christ from Abraham to Joseph, 18 He was conceived by tk* 
Holy Ghost \ and bom of the Virgin Mary when she was espoused to Joseph . 
19 The angel satisfieth the misdeeming thoughts of Joseph, and interpreted^ the 
names of Christ • 

T HE book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of 
Abraham. 

2 Abraham begat Isaac ; and Isaac begat Jacob ; and Jacob begat Jndas and 
his brethren $ 

3 And Jndas begat Phares and Zara of Thamar ; and Phares begat Esrom j and 
Esrom begat Aram ; 

4 And Aram begat Amin adab ; and Aminadab begat Naasson ; and Naassoo 
begat Salmon ; 

5 And Salmon b gat Boos of Rachab ; and Boos begat Obed of Ruth ; and 
Obed begat Jesse; 

6 And Jesse begat David the king ; and David the king begat Solomon of hef 
that had been the wife of Urias; 

7 And Solomon begat Roboam ; and Roboam begat Abia ; and Abia begat 
Asa; 

8 And Asa begat Josaphat; and Josaphat begat Joram; and Joram begat 
Ozias; 

9 And Ozias begat Joatham; and Joatham begat Achaz; and Achaz begat 
Ezekias; 

IO And Ezekias begat Manasses ; and Manasses begat Amon ; and Amon begat 
Josias; 

11 And Josias begat Jechonias and his brethren, about the time they were 
carried away to Babylon: 

12 And after they were brought to Babylon, Jechonias begat Salathiel; and 
Salathiel begat Zorobabel ; 

13 And Zorobabel begat Abiud ; and Abiud begat Eliakim ; and Eliakim begat 
Azor; 

14 And Azor begat Sadoc; and Sadoc begat Achim ; and Achim begat Eliud; 
1 $ And Eliud begat Eleazar ; and Eleazar begat Matthan ; and Matthan begat 
Jacob; 

16 And Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus, 
who is called Christ* 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


17 So all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen generations ; 
and from David until the carrying away into Babylon are fourteen generations; 
and from the carrying away into Babylon unto Christ are fourteen generations. 

18 Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise : When as his mother Mary 
aras espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child of 
the Holy Ghost. 

19 Then Joseph her husband, being a just man, and not willing to make her a 
publick example, was minded to put her away privily. 

20 But while he thought on these things, behold, the angel of the Lord 
appeared unto him in a dream, saying, Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to 
take unto thee Mary thy wife : for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy 
Ghost 

21 And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name JESUS : for 
he shall save his people from their sins. 

22 Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the 
Lord by the prophet, saying, 

23 Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they 
shall call his name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us. 

24 Then Joseph being raised from sleep did as the angel of the Lord had 
bidden him, and took unto him his wife : 

25 And knew her not till she had brought forth her firstborn son : and he 
called his name JESUS. 

The book of the generation. — Thus it is verbally in the Greek, 
Latin, Syrian, Arabic, Egyptian, Persian texts. But the Ethiopian 
has the genealogy of Jesus Christ . Matthew here seems to imitate 
Moses. Listen to what blessed Peter Damian says in his Sermon 
on S. Matthew: “As Moses is not improperly placed before the 
prophets and all who have written anything in the Old Testament, 
so Matthew rightly takes precedence of all who are found to have 
written in the New Testament. For as Moses compiled (Jexif) an 
account of the origin of the world, so has Matthew described the 
rising newness of the Church, as it were of a spiritual world 
Hence it has been provided that, the Holy Spirit guiding the pen, 
both Moses and S. Matthew placed the same commencement to 
their respective works, saying, * The Book of the Generation/ ” 
So far Damian. Now Moses, in Gen. v. 1, thus begins the account 
of the genealogy and race of Adam, the first formed man — The 
Book of the generation of Adam : for Adam was a type of Christ. 
For as Adam was the father of the mortal life of all men, so is 
Christ the Father of the immortal life of the faithful, as S. Paul 

B 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


2 


GENEALOGY OF CHRIST 


teaches, Rom. v. 14, &c., and 1 Cor. xv. 47 et seq. The Hebrew 
is nninn 1BD sepher toledoth , *>., the book, cr catalogue, and 
enumeration of the generations of Adam. For, in the 5th of 
Genesis, many, indeed all the generations are given by which the 
human race was propagated from Adam to Noah and the Flood, 
whence it is probable that S. Matthew, who alludes to Moses, 
wrote likewise in Hebrew, in this passage, sepher toledoth , t.e., the 
book of the generations, in the plural. The LXX, however, in 
Gen. v., have translated ycvco-cu*, the Book of the generation, in 

the singular, because the generation of Adam was one, by which 
he, as it were the patriarch of the whole human race, begat Seth, 
which generation was afterwards continued by Seth and his pos- 
terity, and was propagated as far as Noah. The Greek interpreter 
of S. Matthew, and the Latin Vulgate, which was translated from 
the Greek, here followed the LXX, because properly there is 
related the generation of Christ alone, whose origin indeed is 
derived from Abraham, through many generations of forefathers, 
and is brought down to Christ. As, therefore, Adam was the 
beginning or origin of the old world, so is Christ of the new and 
better world, whence he is called by Isaiah (ix. 6), “ The Father 
of the coming age." (Vulgate). Hence also Virgil, following the 
Cumsean Sibyl, sings thus concerning Him, Eclogue iv. : — 

** Now the last age of Cumaean Verses is come, 

Afresh the great cycle of ages begius ; 

Retnrneth the Virgin, Saturnian Kingdoms return r 
The heavenly Offspring descends fiom on hi,;h: ” 


and adds : — 

“ Dear increase of God, true Offspring of Jove, 

Begin, Boy, by smiles thy Mother to know.” 

It is plain that these things were spoken by the Sibyl concerning 
Christ; but Virgil, either through ignorance or flattery, has 
transferred them to Pollio, the son of Asinius Pollio, the Roman 
Consul. 

Note, 1st, Book here is the same as catalogue, or enumeration. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


CHRIST THE SON OF DAVID. 


3 


or description, whence the Syriac translation, NnTD, ketobo, i >., a 
description, or writing. For this is the exact meaning of the 
Hebrew, sepher, to which the Greek and Latin liber corre- 

spond. In a like sense, the paper in which was recorded the putting 
away of a wife by her husband was called a Book of divorcement . 
So the Book of the righteous is the catalogue in which the names and 
acts of the righteous are recorded. The Book of Life is the cata- 
logue of the elect, who are written in the mind of God as in a book. 
Cicero called a catalogue of names, a book of names. 

Note, 2nd, the word generation. First, and most evidently, it is 
the same as the race, or genealogy of Christ. Second, the genera- 
tion of Christ is the conception and birth of Christ. See ver. 18. 
The birth (y&vTpus) of fesus Christ was on this wise. Third, as Mal- 
donatus observes* “ the generation of Christ is the life of Christ" 
For Matthew, in the Gospel, relates the history of the whole course 
of the life of Christ Fourth, the Hebrew toledoth properly signifies 
generations, many of which intervened between Adam and Christ. 
T He steps in Jacob's ladder, above which God stood, represented 
these generations — those steps, I mean, by which the angels ascended 
from earth to heaven. For as this ladder joined, as it were, earth 
to heaven, and Jacob to God, so this series of generations united 
all the patriarchs to Christ, who was made Flesh, and so united 
all men to Himself and to God. 

Son of David i i.e. t descendant of David : for the Hebrews call all 
male lineal descendants, sons. The Evangelist places David 
first, then Abraham : ist, because David was the nearer to Christ, 
and through him Christ reaches to Abraham ; 2nd, because thus, 
in a more compendious manner, without repetition, Christ's 
genealogy is stated. He wished to impress this fact, that Christ 
was descended from Abraham through David. So S. Jerome. 
3rd, and chiefly, because the promise of God made to David con- 
cerning Christ, as about to be bom of his posterity, was the later, 
more special, and more glorious promise, as S. Chrysostom, 
Theophihis, Euthym., teach. Hence the Jews constantly call their 
Messiah the Son of David. Hence on Palm Sunday, when Christ 

b 2 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


4 


CHRIST THE SON . " ABRAHAM. 


entered into Jerusalem, they hailed Him as Messiah : Hosanna to 
the Son of David, t\e., O Lord, save our Messiah, speaking of Him 
as David's son and heir. Lastly, by the title, Son of Dom'd, the 
nobility of the race from whence Messiah sprung is hinted at, as 
also His kingdom, viz., that He too should be a king, as being the 
Son of David, a king, according to that divine voice of the Arch- 
angel Gabriel to the Blessed Virgin, “He shall be great, and 
shall be called the Son of the Highest, and the Lord God shall 
give unto Him the throne of His father David, and He shall reign 
over the house of Jacob for ever, and of His kingdom there shall 
be no end." (S. Luke i. 31.) For this reason the prophets every- 
where speak of Christ as David's son and heir, thus Is. ix. 7, lv. 3 ; 
Jer. xxv. 5 ; Ez. xxxiv. 23, xxxvii. 25 ; Amos ix. 11, &c. 

The first promise which was made to David concerning Christ, 
that He should spring from him, and reign for ever, is found 
2 Sam. vii. 12 ; the same was confirmed, Ps. lxxxix. and cxxxii. ; 
and repeated to Solomon, David’s Son, 1 Kings ix. 5. When, 
therefore, S. Matthew says, Jesus Christ the Son of David \ he means 
that all these promises were now fulfilled in Christ. Thus S. 
Chrysostom 2; Theophilus, Euthym. ; Irenaeus, lib. 8, c. 8; S. 
Ambrose, lib. 3 in Luc., c. 3 ; and others. 

Son of Abraham. The word Son here may be referred either to 
David or to Christ. For David, as well as Christ, was a son, i.e. t 
a descendant, of Abraham. It signifies* therefore, that Christ, 
through David His father, was also the Son of Abraham, who 
was the father of them that believe, and of the ancient Church. 
The first express promise concerning Christ was made to him. 
(Gen. xxii. 18.) Now, from the birth of Abraham to the birth of 
Christ there were 2,000 years ; from the death of David to Christ, 
1,013 years. So great was the antiquity of the oracles and 
promises of God concerning Christ; so constant and sure was 
God’s faithfulness m fulfilling them. And this is why S. Matthew 
so carefully derives the genealogy of Christ from Abraham, even 
through forty- iwo generations, in order that he might show the 
Jews that Jesus Chnst was the true Messiah promised toAbraham, 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



THE FEMALE ANCESTORS OF CHRIST. 


5 


and that He was the Son of Abraham and the rest of the patri- 
archs ; and that He might therefore, as such, be received, cherished, 
and worshipped by the Jews. 

Ver. 2 . — Abraham begat Isaac . These two, with those who came 
after them, were the first patriarchs, the founders of the synagogue 
and people of God, and of the Kingdom of Christ. They, as 
types, foreshadowed Him. (See comment on Genesis, where I 
have unfolded their genealogies.) I will not here repeat what has 
been said. God constantly calls Himself the God of Abraham, 
Isaac, and Jacob, and even makes a boast, so to say, of this title. 
Wherefore He chose the posterity of Abraham, descending 
through Isaac and Jacob, for His own family and Church, and 
gave them the sign and pledge of circumcision. Wherefore 
God changed Abraham’s name from Abram, i>., a high father, to 
Abraham, that is to say, JiDTi 3 K ab rah hamon> or the father 
of a great multitude — viz., of the believing people that should be 
born of him according to the flesh ; in like manner as of Christ, 
both Jews and Gentiles, who believe in Him, are born according 
to the Spirit. Now Isaac — i.e. laughter — about to be offered up 
by his father on Mount Moriah, clearly represented Christ, who 
was crucified on the same mount, and brought salvation and joy 
to the whole world. 

Ver. 3 . — -Judah begat Pharez and Zara of Tamar . (See what I 
have said on Tamar, Gen. xxxviii. 29.) 

Observe that in the genealogy of Christ, with the exception of 
His Blessed Mother, only four females are made mention of, three 
of them harlots — Tamar, Rahab, and Bathsheba— and the fourth 
a Gentile, Ruth the Moabitess. Rahab, too, was a Gentile, 
being an inhabitant of Jericho. If the reason of all this be asked, 
SS. Jerome, Chrysostom, Ambrose answer, that it was so because 
Christ would signify that “ He who came for the abolishing and 
putting away of sins wished to be born of sinners." This reason 
is true, but allegorical. The literal and simple reason is, that 
these women were united to their husbands, not in the ordinary 
way, but after a new and extraordinary mannef ; and so they 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


6 


FOLLY OF PRIDE OF BIRTH. 


became types of the Church of Christ, which, when the Jews were 
rejected, was gathered out of the Gentiles by a new vocation, and 
after a new manner. Tamar, because Shelah was denied her in 
marriage, or rather because her union with him was deferred, 
using deceit, prostituted herself to Judah. Bathsheba, the wife o t 
Uriah, was united to David, first by adultery, then in marriage. 
Rahab married Salmon because she hospitably received and pro- 
tected the Hebrew spies who were sent by Joshua to Jericho, and 
so she became of the same faith and religion. Ruth married Boaz 
when she had passed with her mother-in-law, Naomi, from Moab 
into Judaea. 

The tropologieal sense is tp show us the vanity of pride of birth, 
and that true nobility consists, not in ancestry, but in our own 
good disposition and virtues. Thus S. Chrysostom. Wherefore 
let no one be ashamed of his birtb, nor even of vile and wicked 
ancestors; but let us say with Cicero, “I have outshone my 
forefathers in virtue." There pan be no doubt that there are in 
the ancestry of the most exalted persons, forasmuch as they are 
N sprung from Adajn, many ignoble, worthless, wicked, and 
infamous persons. Plato, according to Seneca (. Epis . 44), is of 
opinion that all kings are descen4ed from servants* and that all 
servants are sprung from kings ; that there is no king who has 
been entirely free from the plough, and no ploughman who has 
not been mixed up with kings. 

Lastly, Solomon, amongst the other vanities and uncertainties 
of the world, reckons this : “ Out of prison one cometh to reign, 
whereas also he that is bora in his Ipngdoip becometh poor/ 9 
(Eccles. iv, 14.) 

Aminadab . He was prince of the tribe pf Judah when the 
Israelites came opt of Egypt, who, when the rest stood still, 
fearing to go intp the Red Sea, although God had made dry 
ground through the midst of it, courageously entered into it, and 
brought his own tribe safely through, and then the other princes 
and tribes followed. This is a Hebrew tradition. To this 
alludes the verse, Cant. vi. 12, “My soul made me like the 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


omissions in Christ’s genealogy. 7 

chariots of Amminadib.” His son Naasson succeeded him in the 
headship of the tribe. 

Jesse, or, according to a different punctuation of the Hebrew, 
Ism. The name itself prefigured Jesus Christ; who was to be 
born of him. For Jesse and Jesus are the same word if we con- 
sider the root of both, which is to be found in the Hebrew 
iasca, t\e., to save. 

Of her which had been the wife of Urias . After Uriah's death, 
David married his wife, and of her he begat Solomon, for 
Solomon was not bom of adultery, but in wedlock. In this 
passage it is intimated that God did not recall the promises which 
He had made to David on account of his adultery with Bathsheba, 
but, on their repentance, He confirmed His promises. Whence 
from Bathsheba and her son Solomon Christ was descended. In 
truth, Bathsheba herself became a saintly penitent, and brought 
up Solomon her son in a holy manner. Yea, she became 
illustrious for the spirit of prophecy, as I have shown in Prov. 
xxxi. i, on the words, ‘ f The words of Lemuel the king* the vision 
which his mother taught him/' (Vulgate.) 

Now Joram begat Ozias — not directly, but with three generations 
intervening; for Joram was really the father of Ahaziah, Ahaziah 
of Joash, Joash of Amaziah, Amaziah of Azariah or Uzziah, for 
he had both names. (See I Chron. iii. 12, &c.) 

It is asked why S. Matthew here omits these three links in the 
genealogy. S. Jerome answers, because the Evangelist wished 
to form three exact series of fourteen generations each, on which 
see ver. 17. And because Jehoram had allied himself to the most 
wicked Jezebel and to Ahab, in taking Ahab's sister, the impious 
Athaliah, to wife; for God had sworn that, on account of Ahab's 
impiety and idolatry, He would blot out all his posterity. (1 Kings 
xxi. 21, &c.) Posterity in Scripture is reckoned to the fourth 
generation. Here, then, it is blotted out, forasmuch as it is 
omitted and obliterated by S. Matthew. Thus S. Hilary, S. 
Thomas, Jansen, &c. Gaspar Sanchez gives another reason. He 
conjectures that Matthew actually wrote as follows : “ Joram begat 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


3 


BABYLONIAN CAPTIVITY. 


Ochoziah, Ochoziah begat Joash, Joash begat Amaziah, Amaziah 
begat Oziah;” but that the copyist, misled by the similarity 
between Ochoziah and Oziah, as the names are written in Greek, 
by a slip of his eye passed over from Ahaziah to Uzziah. Thus 
Gaspar. But this would be an enormous blunder, and though one 
copyist might fall into such an error, it was scarcely possible that 
all could. All extant MSS. and Version^ are alike here — Greek, 
Syriac, Latin, Arabic, &c. “ Joram legal Ozias ,” not Ahaziah . 

Besides, if thes'e three generations were inserted, they would make 
seventeen generations, whereas S. Matthew says expressly there 
were fourteen generations. 

Josias legal Jeehonias and his brethren . Josias begat four sons. 
The first was Johanan; the second, Jehoiakim, who is also 
Eliakim; the third, Jehoahaz, also called Shallum; the fourth, 
Zedekiah, who is also Mattaniah. Jehoahaz, although the third 
son, succeeded his father Josiah immediately upon his death; but 
Pharaoh, King of Egypt, removed him, and placed his brother 
Jehoiakim upon the throne. After he had reigned eleven years, 
Nebuchadnezzar slew him, and gave the crown to his son Jehoia- 
chin. Him he shortly afterwards dethroned, and made his uncle 
Zedekiah king. When Zedekiah rebelled, he took him captive, 
and put out his eyes ; and in him that branch of David’s royal line 
came to an end. 

The carrying away to Babylon — Greek brl tt}? /Aeroucccnas 
— that is, about the time of the transmigration to 
Babylon, or the Babylonish captivity, in which the Jews were 
carried away by Nebuchadnezzar to Babylon. 

The transmigration of the Jews to Babylon took place at three 
different times. The first was in the eleventh year of King 
Jehoiakim, when Daniel and Ezekiel were carried away. The 
second was three months afterwards, when Mordecai, Esther's 
uncle, was carried away, together with Jehoiachin, the son of 
Jehoiakim. The third, and most complete, captivity was eleven 
years afterwards, under King Zedekiah, when almost all the 
people who were left were taken away. 


Digitized by 


Google 


OBJECTION OF PORPHYRY. 


9 


Ver. 12. — Jeconias legal Salat hieL There is a great difficulty 
here, which Porphyry, the enemy of Christ and of Christians, 
was in the habit of bringing- forward as insuperable. For this 
Jeconias, the father of Salathiel, was not the Jehoiakim the son of 
Josiah, who is spoken of in the preceding verse, but the son of 
that Jehoiakim, and the grandson of Josiah, and consequently there 
are only thirteen generations, instead of fourteen, as S. Matthew 
enumerates. 

S. Jerome replies that this Jeconias is a different person from 
Jeconias, the son of Josiah. The former was Jehoiakim, or 
Jechonias , and Jeconias by a corruption. The latter is properly 
Jehoiachin. Josiah begat Jehoiakim, and Jehoiakim begat Jehoia- 
chin. One generation must, therefore, be supplied in this place. 
“Now Jecomas legal Jechonias ” as some Greek and Latin MSS. 
do read. That what has been said is correct, is clear from 
I Chron. ill. 15, 16, and 2 Kings xxiii. and xxiv. 

The generation in question was omitted, either by S. Matthew 
himself, in order to avoid the repetition of the two similar names, 
as S. Augustine thinks, or, more probably, through the fault and 
ignorance of transcribers, who, mistaking Jechonias for Jeconias , 
thought that one of the two was redundant, and so omitted it 
This was the opinion of S. Epiphanius. 

Ver. 16 .-—Jacob legal Joseph , the husland of Mary . You may 
ask, why is the generation of Christ here derived from the gene- 
alogy of Joseph ? Christ was the Son, not of Joseph, but of the 
Virgin Mary, especially if S. Mary were able, as it might appear, 
to marry a man of another tribe, as her cousin Elizabeth, who 
was of the tribe of Judah, like Mary herself, married Zachariah, 
a priest, and therefore of the tribe of Levi. 

The answer is, that Jewish women might, indeed, marry into 
another tribe : but if they themselves, in the failure of heirs male, 
became heiresses of their fathers, they were in that case obliged 
to marry husbands of their own tribe and family, that their inheri- 
tance might not pass by marriage into another tribe. (See the la«* 
chapter of Numbers, ver. 7.) 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



10 


CHRIST THE HEIR OF DAVID. 


Joakim, the father of the Blessed Virgin, had no male children, 
a fact which S. Matthew here omits, as something perfectly well 
known in the age in which he writes. Hence it became the duty 
of S. Mary to marry a husband of her own tribe and family, that 
is to say, Joseph. Thus the genealogy of Joseph became the 
genealogy of the Blessed Virgin, and consequently of Christ, the 
Lord. Thus, too, it is, that the Fathers teach universally that 
Joseph and Mary were of the same tribe and family. 

It may be yet further asked, why S. Matthew unfolded the 
genealogy of Joseph rather than of Mary, since Christ was bom 
of her alone, being a Virgin ? I answer : — First, because among 
the Jews, and other nations, genealogy is customarily reckoned 
through fathers and husbands, not through mothers and wives. 
Second, because Joseph was the true and lawful father of Christ, 
after the manner which I shall explain presently. And Christ was 
the heir of David's throne and sceptre, not through Mary, but 
through Joseph, according to God's promise to David, 2 Sam. vii. 
12 ; Ps. lxxxix. and cxxxii. The sceptre, therefore, of Judah 
devolved upon Jesus Christ, not only by the promise and gift of 
God, but by the right ot hereditary succession. For if, by 
common right, sons succeed to their fathers' inheritance, when 
they are only accounted their sons by common repute, how much 
more was Christ Joseph's, His father's, heir, since He was the 
Son of his wife, by the power and the gift of the Holy Ghost ? 
Wherefore as Joseph had a parent's right over Christ, indeed, all 
rights which parents have over sons, so on the other hand, Christ 
had, with reference to Joseph, all the rights which sons have in 
respect to their parents. He had therefore a right to the kingdom 
of Israel after Joseph's death. Hence the question of the Magi 
(ii. 2), “ Where is he that is born King of the Jews ? " This 
was what S. Matthew wished to demonstrate, who, as S. Augustine 
says, insists, most of all the Evangelists, upon the kingship of 
Christ. And this explains why he gives the genealogy of Joseph, 
rather than of Mary. For she could not be the heiress of the 
kingdom, so long as heirs male, like Joseph and others, survived. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


HOW CHRIST WAS SON OF JOSEPH. 


II 


Whence also it must be said, as a consequence, that the father and 
other ancestors of Joseph were first-born, or at least eldest 
surviving- sons of their fathers, so that the right of reigning 
devolved upon them. 

This is what is meant in the first chapter of S. Luke by the 
words, “And the Lord God will give unto him the throne of 
his father David." So likewise in Gen. xlix. io, “The sceptre 
shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his 
feet, until Shiloh come," that is, Christ, who was to restore to 
Judah the sceptre, iniquitously taken away by Herod ; yea, who 
was to raise their kingdom to a far higher grandeur, by making 
it spiritual instead of corporeal, heavenly instead of earthly, and, 
instead of temporal, eternal. 

Observe the expression, Joseph the husband of Mary . The 
Arabic has — the spouse of Mary . From this we may gather that 
S. Joseph had all the rights of a real husband with regard to the 
Virgin, and consequently is rightly and truly called the father of 
Christ This is pointed out by S. Augustine. 

1. Christ may be said to be the fruit of the marriage of 
Joseph and Mary, because He was born in wedlock, though not of 
wedlock. He may therefore be ascribed either to His father or 
His mother. 

2. Forasmuch as a man and his wife are made one by mar- 
riage, as it were but one person in the eye of the law, therefore 
they have everything in common, and so all their legitimate 
children : for I except children bom of adultery. They have the 
adulterer as their father, and belong to him. 

Christ, then, who was the Son of the Virgin Mother of God, 
was also the Son of Joseph, who was her husband, and therefore 
the partner of all her honours and blessings. 

Joseph was more truly the father of Christ than one who 
adopts a son is the father of that son. He is only a father by 
adoption, but Joseph was father of Christ by marriage. Hence 
it follows that Joseph had a father’s authority over Christ, and 
therefore the utmost solicitude and affection for him. And Christ 


Digitized by 


Google 



12 


DIGNITY OF SAINT JOSEPH. 


in return cherished, loved, and honoured Joseph as a father, and 
was obedient to him, a s is plain from Luke ii. 51. “ This subjec- 
tion," as Gerson says, " marks at once the unspeakable humility 
of Christ, and the incomparable dignity of Joseph and Mary." 

3. Because Christ properly belonged to the family of Joseph : 
for He belonged to His mother's family, as His mother herself 
belonged to Joseph’s. There was therefore upon earth one most 
noble, yea, divine and heavenly family, of which the father and 
ruler was Joseph ; the mother, the Blessed Virgin ; the son, 
Christ. In it were the three most exalted and excellent persons of 
the whole world ; first, Christ, both God and man ; secondly, the 
Virgin Mother of God, most closely united to Christ ; and thirdly, 
Joseph, the father of Christ by marriage. 

The common herd of men, yea, many of this world’s wise ones, 
think of Joseph only as a poor and despised carpenter. But the 
more despised and unknown he was upon earth, so much the 
greater is his glory in heaven. Wherefore Gregory XV. hath 
lately decreed that his Festival shall be celebrated as a Double by 
the whole Church on the 19th of March. And this is a well- 
deserved honour; for consider, from what I am about to subjoin, 
how great were his prerogatives, his office, and dignity above all 
other men. 

1. Joseph was the husband of the Blessed Virgin, and the father 
of Christ, as I have already shown. He was therefore the head 
and superior both of the Virgin, and of Christ as He was man. 
Hence, 

2. There was singular love and reverence, on the part both ot 
the Blessed Virgin and of Christ, towards Joseph. Whence John 
Gerson, Chancellor of Paris ( Strm . de Nalw. B . V . M.)> exclaims, 
“O, altogether wonderful is thy exaltation, O Joseph, incom- 
parable thy dignity, that the Mother of God, the Queen of 
Heaven, the lady of the world, should not disdain to call thee 
lord!" S. Gregory Nazianzen (Oral, n), denotes and celebrates 
the excellence of the husbanc^ of his sister, Gorgonia, by this one 
title, that he was Gorgonia’s husband. "Do you wish," he says. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


SANCTITY OF SAINT JOSEPH. 


13 


“ that I should describe the man ? He was her husband, and 1 
know of nothing more that I need say/' You may say the same 
of S. Joseph. Do you desire to know who and how great he 
was ? He was the husband of the Mother of God. 

3. The ministry and office of Joseph was most noble, in that 
it pertains to the order of the hypostatic union of the Word with 
our flesh. For Joseph exercised all his labours and actions in 
immediate proximity to the Person of Christ. He nourished, 
cherished, and guarded Christ, and taught Him his art as a 
carpenter, according to the common opinion of the Doctors. Hear 
Franc. Suarez (3 pari, quasi. 29, disp. 8, sect . 1): — “There are 
some offices which pertain directly to the order of grace making 
grateful, and in this the Apostles hold the highest rank, and there- 
fore need greater assistance of grace than all others. There are, 
again, other offices which pertain to the order of the hypostatic 
union, which is m genere a higher order, as is plain from the 
motherhood of God in the Blessed Virgin. And in this order 
S. Joseph exercised his ministry. 

4. Joseph, by his familiar and constant companionship with 
Christ and the Blessed Virgin, was made a sharer in their divine 
secrets, and daily beheld and imitated their lofty virtues. 

5. Joseph was a person of the utmost sanctity, and endowed by 
God with singular gifts, both of nature and grace, so that in that 
age there was no man more holy, or more worthy the betrothal 
of the Mother of God. Whence Suarez thinks it probable that 
Joseph was superior to the Apostles and John the Baptist in grace 
and glory, because his office was more excellent than theirs; 
for it is more to be the father and governor of Christ than His 
preacher and forerunner. He adds that when Joseph espoused 
the Blessed Virgin, he was of mature age, and died before the 
Crucifixion. This is why in the Passion of Christ no mention is 
made of Joseph. Lastly, he rose with Christ in common with the 
rest of the patriarchs, of whom mention is made in Matt, xxvii. 
52 — “ Many bodies of the saints which slept arose/’ These are 
the things in which Joseph was pre-eminent. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



*4 


CHRIST SPRUNG FROM MART ALONE. 


Of whom was bom Jesus. The form of expression is here 
changed. The Evangelist doefc not say, Joseph begat Jesus , as he 
had said of Abraham and the rest. Neither does he say, Mary 
begat Jesus , but of whom was bom Jesus. By this expression he 
signifies — i. That Jesus was bom of Mary, not by natural means, 
but by supernatural — that is to say, by the operation of the Holy 
Ghost. 2. That Jesus was not sprung from His father Joseph, but 
bom of His mother alone, she being a virgin, and therefore that 
Joseph had no other connection with the geneaology of Christ 
than by right of his wife, the Virgin Mary. 

Well does S. Bernard say (Horn. I super Missus esf ) — “Very 
beautiful was the mingling of humility and virginity; nor is that 
soul in only a slight degree pleasing unto God, in which humility 
commends virginity, and virginity adorns humility ; but of what 
veneration must she be worthy whose fruitfulness exalteth humility, 
and childbirth consecrates virginity ?” And again — “Such a 
nativity became God, that He should not be bom save of a 
Virgin: such a birth became a Virgin, that she should bring 
forth only God." It was fitting that, as Christ had a Father in 
heaven, He should have no father upon earth, but only a mother ; 
for He who was without a mother in heaven (<i prjfrvp) was with- 
out a father on earth (<tWrc op). For it behoved that the Con- 
ception and the Birth of Christ should be removed as far as pos- 
sible from original sin — that as it was not right that He should 
contract it, so neither should it be possible. And in this He was 
superior to His mother ; for she, although conceived without sin 
by the singular preservation of God, nevertheless was bound, 
through that natural conception of herself whereby she was born 
of Joachim and Anna by natural generation from Adam, to have 
contracted it, unless it had been prevented by the grace of God. 
Lastly, it behoved that the Birth of Christ should be most divinely 
pure, that it might powerfully commend virginity and chastity to 
us. Whence S. Gregory Nazianzen ( Orat . 38, de Nativ. in 
principio) says, “ Christ was bom of a virgin : O ye women, do 
ye then cherish virginity, that ye may be able to be mothers of 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


HOW MART IS MOTH1R OF GOD* 


IS 


Christ.” And Cyril of Jerusalem says, “Christ was bom that 
He might make virgins ; much more, therefore, ought a virgin to 
keep chaste her body.” 

2. The expression — Of whom was bom Jesus — signifies that the 
Virgin was the real mother of Jesus — *>., of that Man who, being 
hypostadcally united with God, was both God and man. There- 
fore was she truly the mother of God. For although she was not 
the mother of Deity, yet did she give birth to God, because she 
was mother of that Man. For that Man was God, therefore the 
Blessed Virgin was mother of God. 

The reason, a priori \ is identity of Person, because there is but 
one Person, and that a Divine Person, in Christ. Hence the attri- 
butes of either nature can be predicated of Him; and there 
becomes a joint participation of the peculiarities of each ; so that 
this Man may be called God, and in return, God may be called 
Man, the Son of the Virgin, and it can be said that God suffered 
and was crucified, Ac. For one Person is presupposed in these 
expressions, who gathereth up into Himself all the actions and 
passions of both natures. Wherefore the Person of the Son of 
God, who is God, is rightly spoken of as born of the Virgin Mary, 
but according to His human, not His divine nature. 

The surpassing dignity, therefore, of the Blessed Virgin is here 
indicated : for such is the motherhood of God, that from her He 
received His own, that is to say, His human substances, such as 
flesh, bones, blood ; and received it in such sort that He cherished, 
loved, and reverenced her as His mother, and was obedient to her 
as a mother, and spoke of her as “mother.” Whence S. Bernard 
exclaims in admiration, “A twofold wonder, a twofold miracle; 
God obeys a woman — humility without a parallel ; and a woman 
is the head of God — dignity beyond compare I ” 

The Virgin Mother of God possessed the same right and 
authority over Christ which other mothers have over their own 
sons. Yea, she had more than other mothers have, because she 
was more the mother of Christ than other women are mothers of 
their sons, for a reason which I shall adduce presently. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



l6 THE INCARNATION GOD*S GREATEST WORK. 

S. Thomas (i part . quasi. 25, art . 6) teaches that God could not 
perform a greater work than the Incarnation of the Word, and 
the maternity of the Blessed Virgin, because she is the very 
Mother of God — God than whom nothing greater can be 
imagined. Hence Bede saith, “ O most blessed Virgin, in thee 
alone that rich, yea, more than rich, King emptied Himself.” 
For to be Mother of God is the highest affinity, consanguinity, 
and union with God. By that motherhood the Blessed Virgin 
Mary is in as close relationship with God as a mother is with her 
son. 

From this dignity of Mother of God, there follow all the gifts 
and privileges which have been granted to the Blessed Virgin by 
God above all men and angels. For as the Humanity of Christ, 
being united to the Word, receiveth from the Word such gifts 
and privileges as are becoming to such a union — I mean such as 
may exalt that Humanity, and render It, as it were, worthy of 
union with the Word ; so, in like manner, God showered upon 
Mary all the gifts and graces which befitted such a Mother of 
Christ and Spouse of God. Whence you may draw this conclu- 
sion — Mary is the Mother of God, therefore she is far more excel- 
lent than all the angels, even the Cherubim and Seraphim. She 
is the Mother of God, therefore she is Queen and Lady of heaven 
and earth. She is the Mother of God, therefore whatsoever 
privilege has been granted to any of the Saints, that she obtains 
in a more excellent degree. 

3. Of whom was bom Jesus, signifies that He was born of His 
Mother only, so that she alone contributed to Christ all that flesh 
and substance which other fathers and mothers are wont to con- 
tribute conjointly to their children. For sons derive a portion ot 
their substance from their fathers, a portion from their mothers. 
Wherefore the Blessed Virgin contributed more to Christ than 
other mothers are wont to contribute to their sons, because she 
alone was, in a manner, both father and mother of Christ. 

Hence it follows — 1. That the Blessed Virgin hath more right 
in Christ than other mothers have in their sons. 2. That Maiy 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



OFFICE OF THE HOLT GHOST IN THE INCARNATION. I 7 

had far greater love for Christ, and Christ for her, than other 
mothers have for their sons, and other sons for their mothers, 
both because she alone bare ( genuif) Him, as well as because she 
bare Him not after the natural, but after the supernatural and 
divine order. So, too, the love which, in other sons, is divided 
between father and mother, in Christ was united, and applied 
wholly to His Mother. And thus she felt, as it were, wit 1 a 
duplicated grief the pains of Christ upon the Cross, and ex- 
perienced a duplicated joy at His Resurrection. 

4. The expression, Of whom was horn , signifies that the Holy 
Ghost was the most potent and efficient cause of the Nativity o! 
Christ, who, within the Blessed Virgin, of her most pure blood, 
formed the Body of Christ, organized It, and gave It life, and 
hypostatically united It to the Word in the first moment of Its 
conception. Still the Blessed Virgin was a secondary cause, and 
a true Mother of Christ for the purpose of generation, not merely 
as passively furnishing the material, but as actively concurring 
therein by way of forming, disposing, and organizing that 
material. See Francis Suarez, 3 p., q. 3, 2 art., 4 ac., q. 33, art. 4, 
where he teaches that Christ’s generation of the Virgin was 
supernatural, as far as its manner and swiftness were concerned, 
because, in one moment, it was perfected by the Holy Ghost as 
the efficient cause. And so the action whereby Mary became a 
mother was natural ; the mode was supernatural. 

Was bom Jesus . The Word was made Flesh. God became 
Man. The Son of God was made the Son of the Virgin. This, 
as S. Thomas teaches at length, was the highest and greatest of 
all the works of God. At this work the Angels and all the Saints 
have ever been and are amazed in wonder. For in It God mani- 
fested His highest power by uniting man to God, clay° to the 
Word, earth to heaven. He manifested also the highest wisdom, 
that He, who in His Godhead might not suffer to redeem us, put 
on, in the Virgin’s womb, flesh, whereby He might be able to suffer, 
and to make satisfaction to the Father for our sins. He manifested 

* Lirnurn , lit. mud, slime. 

C 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



1 8 


MEANING OF GENERATIONS. 


also the highest justice, because by reason of the dignity of Ills 
Person, He makes satisiaction upon equal terms, as it were, to the 
wrath and justice of God, by suffering death upon the Cross. 
And He manifested the utmost goodness, because He emptied 
Himself, that He might replenish us with His gifts. He was made 
the Son of man that He might make us sons of God, as S. Augus- 
tine says. He was born on earth, that man might be born in 
heaven, as S. Gregory says. 

Who is called Christ : that is, who is the Messiah, or the Christ, 
the Redeemer of the world, promised to the Fathers. And 
henceforth He can and ought to be called Messiah, or Christ in 
His own right, and therefore now He is verily so called by all 
the faithful. 

How this genealogy of S. Matthew is reconcilable with that 
of S. Luke, I will unfold in my commentary on the third chapter 
of S. Luke. 

Therefore , all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen 
generations , and from David unto the transmigration (the Syriac has 
txile) of Babylon are fourteen generations , and from the transmigration 
of Babylon unto Christ are fourteen generations . From Abraham, there- 
fore, unto Christ are forty-two generations. S. Luke (chap, iii.) 
enumerates seventy-seven generations, but he places no stress 
upon the number as S. Matthew does. Though S. Augustine, 
c. 2, de consensu Evang ., c. 4., is of opinion that entire remission and 
abolition of all sins, which is effected through Christ, is denoted 
by the seventy-seven generations. Whence Christ commanded 
that forgiveness should be extended to an erring brother seventy 
times seven. (Matt, xviii. 22.) 

By generations, you must understand all the persons, both those 
begetting and those begotten. These are the fourteen. For the 
Greek is not ycvetris, i>., generation , properly called, but ycvca, t\e. f 
offspring , race , family , and children^ the duration of the life of one man . 
For the generations, exactly numbered, are only thirteen in the 
first Tesseradecade, as you will see if you count the recurrence of 
the word ** begat ; 99 which word is repeated thirteen times ; be- 


Digitized by ^ooQle 


MYSTICAL MEANING OF FOURTEEN. 


19 


cause in it alone Abraham is reckoned the first, and David the last 
generation. But in the second Tesseradecade, David, the first in 
it, is not reckoned; nor yet in the third, Jeconias the first name; 
because those persons have been already named and enumerated 
as the last in the second and third Tesseradecades. Therefore, 
in the third Tesseradecade, one generation must be added — 
namely, Jehoiakim begat Jehoiachin — in order that it may consist 
of fourteen generations; that is to say, of fourteen persons 
begetting and begotten, as I have already said. All the genera- 
tions then are precisely forty-one ; but the persons begetting and 
begotten are forty-two, because the generation of the first — 
namely, Abraham — is not reckoned here, but is- presupposed as 
being known from the Book of Genesis. 

You may ask, with what object S. Matthew so accurately enu- 
merates these three Tesseradecades of generations ? The answer 
is, because he wishes to pass in review the threefold condition of 
the Jewish people — the first, the quasi democratic state under the 
several Patriarchs and Judges, such as Othniel, Gideon, Samson, 
Eli, Samuel, &c., who presided over Israel from Abraham to 
David; the second, the monarchical, under kings, as David and 
his descendants, until the captivity ; the third, the aristocratic, 
under dukes and pontiffs, as Judas, Jonathan, Simon, and the rest 
of the Maccabees, from the Babylonish captivity unto Christ. 
Matthew signifies that this threefold condition and government of 
the people was thrice changed, and must be a fourth time changed 
by Christ, and ended in Christ, who brought in an eternal king- 
dom. Thus the Fathers and commentators passim . 

Whence Nazianzen, in his poem on the genealogy of Christ 
says: — 

44 Thus lie deduced a royal race, and kingly sceptre.” 

Maldonatus adds a medical analogy. In fevers, and other 
diseases, physicians call the fourteenth the critical day, and the 
most perilous. Agreeably, therefore, to the nature of man, 
after each period of fourteen generations, God seems to have 
wished to change the condition of His people, that one form of 

c 2 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



20 


PROMISES FULFILLED BY BIRTH OF CHRIST. 


government, as it were, growing sick and failing, a better one 
might be bom and succeed it, until, through Christ, the best of all 
should be substituted, which should heal and correct the defects 
and weakness of the three preceding, and establish the kingdom of 
the Church, flourishing, sound, and eternal. 

Lastly, Matthew enumerates forty-two generations by three 
Tesseradecades, so as to make it a probable conjecture in the mind 
of his reader, that it was fitting that Christ should come after this 
exact number of generations. For as there were fourteen genera- 
tions before the kingdom of the Jews was established, fourteen 
during its continuance, after which, during fourteen generations, it 
evidently declined, so, by a probable conjecture, it might be 
supposed, that after these last fourteen generations, the kingdom 
fading away, it was to be restored to a better state by Jfessiah. 
For as there were fourteen generations before, and fourteen in the 
kingdom, so there were as many after the kingdom of Israel until 
Christ. Again, before the kingdom the promise of Christ was 
made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; in the kingdom to David and 
Solomon ; after the kingdom the same promise was repeated to 
Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi, &c., that there might be a feeling 
that all the promises made concerning Christ, both before, during, 
and after the kingdom were ended and fulfilled in Christ. 

Abraham begins, David ends the first Tesseradecade; Solomon 
begins, Jehoiakim or Jehoiachin ends the second ; Jehoiakim or 
Jehoiachin begins, Christ ends the third. And He is the end of 
the law, and the deliverer of the captive people and the captive 
world. So Francisc. Lucas. For the Jews knew from the decline 
and failure of their commonwealth, and especially when the sceptre 
was taken away from Judah by Herod, according to the prophecy 
of Jacob, Genesis xlix. io, that the Advent of Messiah might 
certainly be expected. Whence their kingdom being broken up, 
and this sceptre transferred, S. Matthew here teaches that Messiah 
was now come, and was none other than Jesus Christ. And thus 
he would persuade the Jews to believe in Him. Symbolically , Origen 
{Horn. 27 in Num.), and S. Jerome (EpisL ad Fabiolam dr 42 Mansion.}, 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



MYSTICAL MEANING OP FORTY- TWO. 


21 


remark, that those forty-two generations correspond to the forty- 
two stations of the Israelites in the wilderness, by which they 
arrived at the land of Canaan promised to Abraham. Similarly, 
through the forty-two generations we arrive at the Messiah, or the 
Christ, promised to the same Abraham, and through Christ, at the 
land of the living, promised to the saints in heaven. 

Again, the number fourteen, because it contains twice seven, by 
which the sevenfold grace of the Holy Ghost is signified, denotes 
the gift of the same Holy Spirit in two-fold abundance to man, as 
it was in Christ, who, indeed, by a like symbol, having suffered 
on the fourteenth day of the month Nisan, when the moon was 
full, redeemed us by His death, and merited abundance of graces 
for us. Wherefore the Psalmist sings concerning Him, Ps. lxxii. : 
“ In his days shall the righteous flourish, yea and abundance of 
peace, so long as the moon endureth.” Listen to S. Ambrose, 
Oration on the death of Theodosius: “In the number fourteen we 
have received man’s perfection; whence the Lord’s Passover 
received the form of its celebration, on the fourteenth day cf the 
moon. Wherefore he who celebrates the Passover ought to be 
perfect, ought to love the Lord Jesus, who, loving His own 
people with a perfect love, offered Himself to His Passion. A 
notable mystery is in the number, since the Father delivered up 
his only Son for us all, when the moon was shining with a full orb 
of light For like this is the Church, which piously celebrates the 
Passover of our Lord Jesus Christ It abideth for ever, like the 
moon at the full Whosoever shall well celebrate here the Lord’s 
Passover, shall be in light, everlastingly.” 

Analogically, the number forty-two is composed of six into seven, 
For six times seven makes forty-two. The six denotes the labours 
of this life, whereby we come to the seven, or the sabbath of rest 
and eternal felicity. For in the six first days of the world God 
made all things in heaven and earth; but in the seventh day, or 
the sabbath, He rested from all His work. 

Tropologically , by this forty-fold number of generations is signi- 
fied the life of the body, as compounded of the four elements. For 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


22 


BLESSED VIRGIN MARY BETROTHED? 


*his life standeth in keeping the ten commandments of God, which 
are perfected by the four Gospels. For ten into four makes forty. 
So Salmeron, so even S. Augustine, and from him Peter Bongus, 
On the Mysteries of Numbers, Num. XIV.: “The three divisions/' 
he says, “ in the generation of Christ, hint at the doctrine of the 
Holy Trinity, which is laid down concordantly by the Law and 
the Gospel. For three signifies faith in the Trinity, four the evan- 
gelical doctrine, ten the institution of the Law." The same author 
adds shortly afterwards : “ That the number fourteen should be 
thrice repeated signifies true religion. For four and ten indicate 
the New and Old Testament. For the way to Christ is preached 
through the Ten Commandments of the Law, and the four Gospels ; 
so, however, that we should consecrate whatever is ascribed to 
the Trinity, that is, to God, because no commandment is fulfilled 
unless this number is preserved in the worship of God. By the 
type of this number, moreover, Ezekiel (chap, xl.) beheld in the 
fourteenth year after the smiting of the city, a new city, even the 
Church, which Christ, born and dying, founded in the fourteenth 
generation after the destruction of Jerusalem by the Chaldees, as 
Cassiodorus remarks (in Ps. xv., sub finem). Lastly, in the forty- 
second year after Christ’s Passion, Jerusalem was utterly destroyed 
by Titus and Vespasian to avenge His death — as S. Jerome 
observes on the words of the Psalm : “ In the next generation let 
his name be clean put out." 

Ver. 1 8 . — Now the Birth of Christ was in this wise. The Birth of 
Christ happened in this manner. For Birth , the Greek has not 
yci/co-is, i.e., generation, properly so called, but yarvrpus, i.e., rise , 
conception, generation, nativity. When any one arises he is con- 
ceived, is begotten, is born. 

When his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came 
together, she was found with child of the Holy Ghost. Syriac, “ of the 
Spirit of holiness ” — that is, the Spirit who is holy, and the Author 
and Fountain of all holiness. 

God willed the Blessed Virgin to be betrothed to Joseph — i. 
Because Joseph appears to have been the nearest heir of David's 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



OR HARRIED TO JOSEPH ? 


23 


kingdom, that it might devolve from him upon Christ, as from a 
father to a son, by due order and right of succession, as I have said, 
ver. 16. 2. Because Joseph was a most holy man, like unto the 

patriarch Joseph, of whose chastity and virtue he partook, as well 
as of his name. He was called Joseph — *>., increased — for he was 
enriched with great gifts and graces from God. Thus S. Bernard, 
Horn. 2 super Missus est. 

You may ask whether it be here meant that the Blessed Virgin 
was espoused to Joseph only by betrothal, or by an actual mar- 
riage contract and celebration of nuptials ; and so, whether Christ 
was incarnate, and conceived of a virgin who was betrothed only, 
or of one who was actually married? For to a virgin thus 
betrothed Gabriel was sent to announce the Incarnation of Christ. 
(Luke i. 38.) And the Virgin, consenting to his message, and 
saying, “ Behold the handmaid of the Lord, be it unto me accord- 
ing to thy word,” immediately, in that very instant, conceived 
Christ. Many are of opinion that the Blessed Virgin was only 
espoused by betrothal, or per verba de fuluro , by which only a 
promise of marriage takes place. So S. Hilary, in loc. ; S. Basil, 
Horn, on the Human Generation of Christ; Origen, Horn. 1, on divers 
passages of the Gospels . But others think, with better reason, that 
the Virgin was espoused not merely by betrothal, but by mar- 
riage, per verba de prcesenii — by an actual nuptial contract. This is 
proved : — 1. Because Joseph is called in the verse following, and 
in ver. 16, the husband of Mary. This must mean that he had 
married her. 2. Joseph wished to put her away, as being with 
child, as it is said in the verse following. He had therefore taken 
her to him to wife ; for no one puts away what he has not. 3. 
Because “ betrothed ” (Luke ii. 5) is interpreted to mean married. 
Yea, Joseph called her his wife. She was therefore already mar- 
ried, and introduced into the house of her husband, Joseph, as his 
wife, that, by this means, Joseph might be the attesting witness of 
her virginity, and the guardian and nourisher both of herself and 
her Child Jesus. Consider, also, that the Blessed Virgin, as soon 
as she had received Gabriel’s message, being now full of the 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



24 


IN WHAT SENSE JOSEPH 


Word, visited Elizabeth, and abode with her three months. From 
whence it does not seem that she there celebrated her marriage 
with Joseph, nor yet after her return to Nazareth, for there exists 
no trace of such an event. So that she must have celebrated this 
marriage before Gabriel’s message, and the Incarnation of the 
Word. Neither would it have been becoming that an unmarried 
virgin should undertake so great a journey into a mountainous 
country, without a husband, or companion, or without her guardian 
sending a maid, or some female relation with her. 4. Because 
it was plainly befitting that Christ should be born of a woman who 
was actually married, in order that he might not be despised by 
the Jews as illegitimate, but might be received as a legitimate son. 
And this is why Joseph is called Christ’s father. Finally, offspring 
is the proper fruit of wedlock. Thus Jerome, Haymo, Chrysostom, 
Theophylact, Ambrose, Jansenius, Suarez, and others, passim . 

It maybe objected — 1. That the angel says to Joseph, “Fear 
not to take Mary thy wife.” Therefore, he had not taken her to 
wife, but only espoused her by betrothal. I reply — to take, here 
means the same thing as to keep , and retain : for the angel calls her 
his wife. They were therefore married. The Hebrew verbs often 
signify not only inchoate, but continuous action. The meaning, 
therefore, is — “ Dismiss not, O Joseph, thy wife Mary, but keep 
and retain her.” For nothing is put away save what has been 
received and possessed. 

2. The Virgin is here called betrothed, before they came together, 
therefore before marriage. In reply, I deny the consequence. To 
come together does not here signify to contract marriage, nor 
yet to cohabit, but to make use of marriage already contracted. 

3. Why is she here spoken of, not as married, but as espoused ? 
I reply, she is called espoused or betrothed, because her husband had 
not known her ; and therefore she was as a bride, not yet married 
to her husband, but only promised. So S. Chrysostom. Hence 
Peter Chrysologus ( Semi . 175) says, Joseph was a husband in 
name only, by consent of his spouse ; that is, he was accounted her 
husband by the bond, not the consummation of marriage. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


was mary's husband. 


25 


That there was, however, a real marriage between Joseph and 
the Blessed Virgin is certain from the words of the Gospel, and 
the common agreement of theologians ; and the axiom of lawyers, 
that — “ Consent, not consummation, validates marriage.” Whence 
S. Augustine (lib. i, de Nuptiis , c. u) says — “The good of 
marriage was fulfilled in those parents of Christ. There was 
offspring, fidelity, a sacrament ” (for these are the three goods 
of marriage). We recognize the offspring, the Lord Jesus Him- 
self; the fidelity, for there was no adultery; the sacrament, for 
there was no divorce/ * He teaches the same more at large against 
Julian the Pelagian (lib. 5), who denied the marriage of Joseph and 
Mary. In chap. 9, he maintains that the jus matrimonii is not re- 
pugnant to a vow of chastity. By marriage, I possess a right over 
my wife, but because of my vow, I cannot use that right lawfully. 
If I do use it, I sin against my vow, not my marriage. That is, I 
do what is, technically, an irreligious, not an unjust act. For there 
is not adultery, as it would be, if the wife were joined in marriage. 
Joseph, therefore, had by matrimony, a power over the Blessed 
Virgin, but by his purpose, and as it would seem by his vow of 
chastity, he would not use this power. To have a right or power 
to do a thing, and to use that power, are wholly different things. 

, The first is necessary for valid matrimony, but not the second. 

This right of cohabitation, and quasi dominion over a wife, in 
the case of married virgins, has several true and real, not 
fictitious consequences. The first is, that a virgin bride cannot 
marry another husband. The second is, that although the vow be 
broken by cohabitation, it is not fornication. The third, that off- 
spring divinely granted and born (as Christ in the present instance 
1 was conceived of the Holy Ghost) is accounted legitimate as being 
born in wedlock. 

From all this, it may be gathered that the marriage of the 
Blessed Virgin Mary with Joseph was not only real matrimony, 
but lawful, yea, holy — real, because the essence of wedlock consists 
in the mutual delivery of power over each other’s body, even 
though this power be never exercised. And a vow of virginity 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



26 


PERPETUAL VIRGINITY OF BLESSED VIRGIN MART. 


take* away this power and right from no one, but only renders its 
exercise unlawful. It is after a similar manner that the power is 
separated from the use of a thing, in the case of certain religious, 
who remain owners of their paternal inheritance, but who, on 
account of their vow of poverty, are not able to make use of it. It 
was lawful marriage, because, although the Blessed Virgin had 
made a vow of virginity, yet she lawfully, and without peril of a 
breach of her vow, engaged in marriage, because she knew by 
the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, that Joseph would never use his 
power and marital rights to the detriment of her vow. So S. 
Augustine, de S. Virgin ., c. 4, and theologians, passim . It is, 
moreover, probable that the Blessed Virgin Mary had revealed 
this, her vow, to Joseph before marriage, and that he had con- 
sented to it. Some add, that he had promised to be the guardian 
of her vow. It was holy marriage, because by means of it Joseph 
protected the good repute and the virginity of Blessed Mary ; and 
became the guardian, nourisher, and educator of the Child Jesus. 
What were more holy than this ? 

See S. Thomas, 3 part 29. 2. 1. in corpore, where he assigns 
many reasons why Christ was born of an espoused virgin. And 
he adds that there might be a fifth reason why the Mother of the 
Lord was espoused and a virgin, in order that in her person both 
virginity and matrimony might be honoured against the heretics, 
who attack either one or the other. The holy martyr Ignatius, 
cited by S. Jerome, gives yet another reason — in order that her 
child-bearing might be concealed from the devil, so that he thought 
that Christ was not born of a virgin, but of a wife. 

Observe here, tropologically , in the Blessed Virgin and Joseph the 
utmost height of angelic purity and virginity. And thus, the 
Blessed Virgin has communicated this gift of conjugal chastity to 
several eminent persons, specially devoted to her, as to S. Pulcheria, 
and Martian, to SS. Julian and Basilissa, to whom, in the first night 
after their vow of chastity, Christ appeared, accompanied by a 
vast throng of men in white robes, on the one hand, and the 
Blessed Virgin, girt about with a virgin throng, on the other hand. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


THE HOLY FAMILY. 


27 


They who were with Christ chanted forth — “ Thou hast conquered 
Julian, thou hast conquered/ 1 And they who were with the Blessed 
Virgin replied — “ Blessed art thou, Basilissa, who hast despised 
earthly marriage, and prepared thyself for eternal glory Where- 
fore Julian was the spiritual ancestor of innumerable believers in 
Christ and martyrs, and Basilissa, by word and example, was the 
mother of innumerable virgins of Christ. 

Also S. Henry I., or as some say, II., Emperor of Germany led 
such a life with his wife Cunegundes, of whom, when he was dying, 
he said to her parents — “ Lo ! a virgin I received her from you, a 
virgin I restore her to you/' Such, too, were S. Caecilia, with her 
spouse Valerian, to whom the Blessed Virgin sent by the hands of 
angels crowns of roses and lilies. 

Symbolically , in this marriage and family union of Joseph with 
Mary there was an image of the Sacred Trinity. For Joseph 
represented the Eternal Father, the Blessed Virgin the Holy 
Ghost, both because she was most holy, and because she had con- 
ceived by the Holy Spirit. Christ represented Himself, even the 
Son of God. Whence, 1. As there is in the Sacred Trinity an 
essence of Deity in Three Persons, so here was there one marriage 
and one perfect family, consisting of three persons, namely, Joseph, 
Mary, and Christ. 2. As in the Holy Trinity the Father spiritually 
begets the Son, and breathes the Holy Ghost, so here the Blessed 
Virgin spiritually— not carnally, but by the power of the Holy 
Ghost— conceived and brought forth Christ. 3. In the Holy 
Trinity, the Father begets the Son, as light emits light : whence 
we sing in the Creed, “ Light of Light, very God of very God ; ” 
so the Blessed Virgin, as the Star of the Sea, brought forth 
Christ, who is “ the Brightness of Eternal Light,” and the 
“ Mirror without a spot.” (Wisd. vii. 25.) Whence, like as a star, 
without any diminution of itself, sends forth its rays, so did the 
Blessed Virgin, without any derogation to herself, bring forth 
Christ the Light of the world. “ Neither do the star’s rays 
diminish its lustre, nor did the Son of the Virgin take away her 
maiden purity and integrity,” says S. Bernard. {Horn. 2 super 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



28 


AN IMAGE OF THE TRINITY. 


Missus esti) Whence also those words of Simeon concerning 
Christ, “A Light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of Thy 
people Israel.” 

This family was then, as it were, a heaven upon earth — a 
family, not so much of three human persons as of three embodied 
angels — yea, symbolically, as it were, of three Divine Persons. 
Therefore it is not doubtful that it was thronged with angels, 
ministering to the Virgin, as Queen of Heaven, and to Christ, as 
their Lord and their God. Yea, they were amazed, and had the 
utmost desire to behold the Word Incarnate. Therefore, that 
house, as it were heaven, was concealing an admirable mystery. 
Black without, but fair within, “ as the tents of Kedar, as the 
curtains of Solomon ” (Cant. i. 5), says Rupert. Whence John 
Gerson {Sermon on the Nativity) exclaims in wonder— “O, how 
delectable to the Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, was that 
house's Trinity, Christ, Mary, Joseph. Nothing dearer, nothing 
better, nothing on earth more excellent Heaven envied earth 
such inhabitants — inhabitants more befitting heaven than earth.” 

. Tropologically t Let husbands and wives imitate the Blessed 
Virgin and Joseph in purity, in sanctity, in patience, and charity, 
bearing one another's burdens. There was in this family of 
Joseph, Mary, and Christ, the utmost concord amongst all, the 
utmost love, the utmost reverence, humility, piety, help, and 
mutual compliance. From it, not only all bickering was absent, 
but even the very lightest suspicion of any evil thing. Hence 
such a family deserved to have Christ, the Holy of Holies, for its 
offspring. In our day, there are often in families depraved, 
disobedient, proud, quarrelsome, impure children, because their 
parents are such. Like father, like child. What he sees and 
hears his father and mother do, that he also imitates and imbibes. 
Children ever ape their parents. 

Before they came together . Understand this not as though they 
afterwards came together for the marital debt, as the impure 
Helvidius maintained, who denied that the Blessed Virgin was 
always a virgin, and asserted that she afterwards became by 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


CONCEPTION OF CHRIST. 


29 


Joseph the mother of those who, in the Gospel, are called the 
Lord’s brethren. S. Jerome confutes him at length, and shows 
that nothing is meant here except the miraculous conception of 
Christ by a pure virgin. Thus we say in common speech, “ Such 
a one had grey hairs before he was an old man,” meaning that 
it was remarkable that he was early grey-headed, even though 
he never became an old man. but died before he came to old age. 
Similarly also we say, “His boy was wise before he came to 
man’s estate,” meaning that he was of precocious intellect, even 
though he died before he was of mature age; as those who 
are precocious do thus often die. Moreover, the brethren of the 
Lord are called His kinsmen. For, as S. Jerome says (Con/. 
Helvid .), brethren are so called in four ways: by nature, race, 
relationship, affection. People are brethren by nature, who are 
born of the same parents, by race, who belong to the same nation, 
as S. Paul calls the Jews his brethren (Rom. ix. 1), by kinship, 
as cousins are called brethren in Scripture, by affection, as when 
Christians love one another with mutual fraternal love. For this 
is the love of the brotherhood, which S. Paul so often commands. 

She was found with child by the Holy Ghost. Observe that Joseph 
understood by her appearance, that his wife, the Blessed Virgin, 
had conceived. But whether he knew that she was with child by 
the Holy Ghost, or not, is doubtful. S. Basil, Origen, Theophylact, 
and others, hold the affirmative. But the contrary is more pro- 
bable, because Joseph wished to put her away, but is forbidden by 
the angel, who removes his scruple, adding, “ That which is con- 
ceived in her is of the Holy Ghost.” Therefore, before the 
revelation of the angel, he did not know this, because had he 
known it, he would not have wished to put her away. 

It is said, therefore, that the Blessed Virgin was found with 
child of the Holy Ghost, because she had verily conceived by Him. 
The expression, by the Holy Ghost, must be referred to the words 
with child \ not to was found. So the rest of the Fathers and 
Interpreters, passim. Origen adds that, “ She was found by the 
angels, for they knew that she had conceived by the Holy Ghost.” 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



30 


BY THE HOLY GHOST 


0 / the Holy Ghost. Not as though Christ were framed of the 
substance of the Holy Spirit, as is the case with other offspring, 
nor of the Holy Ghost as a father; because Christ, qua man, was 
not like to the Holy Ghost, who in His nature is God ; but of the 
Holy Ghost a s an agent and artificer. Thus S. Ambrose, tn 
Luc. i. 35. Of the Holy Ghost, not, therefore, as of the Father, 
but, as it were, supplying the concourse of the father. For the 
Holy Ghost supplied the place of a father to Christ, through His 
power and operation. So S. Ambrose c. 2 , de Spiritu Sancto , c. 5, 
and S. Augustine, Enchiridion, c. 39. For the substance of our 
Lord’s body was supplied by the Blessed Virgin, as His only 
human parent. Strictly speaking, by denotes the efficient cause, of 
the material cause— as we say in the Creed : “ Conceived by the 
Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary.” 

You may ask — why does not Matthew say also, “ With child by 
the Eternal Father, and by the Son, as well as by the Holy 
Ghost ?” It is replied that he might have said this with equal 
truth. For it is an axiom among Theologians, that the operations 
of the Holy Trinity, ad extra — that is, with reference to the universe 
of created things — are common to all the Three Divine Persons. 
But he preferred to say, “ By the Hofy Ghost,” because, as 
power is appropriated to the Father, and wisdom to the Son, so 
love, goodness, and grace, which especially shine forth in this 
work of the Incarnation, are attributed to the Holy Ghost. For 
the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son by spiration, 
being, as it were, the term of the ideal love of the Father and the 
Son. 

Moreover S. Thomas (3 part, qucesi. 32, aft . 1 et seq) teaches that 
the words “ by the Holy Ghost ” signify three things : 1. That of 
the pure love of God and the Holy Spirit, without any human 
merits, the Incarnation of the Lord was accomplished. 2. Of 
the same Grace of God and the Holy Spirit, without previous 
merits, He was conceived. Whence S. Augustine, c. de Prctdest. 
Sanct. c. 15, proposes Christ, as it were, the ideal of election and 
the elect. “Whatsoever man is a Christian, he becomes such 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


AS THE EFFICIENT CAUSE. 


3 


from the beginning of his faith by that self-same grace by which, 
at the first, Christ was made man : by the same Spirit a Christian 
is born again, by whom Christ was born ; remission of sins is 
effected in us by the self-same Spirit by whom it was brought 
about that Christ should have no sin.” 3. Christ was holy, by 
virtue of his conception. For, like as a man, who, by ordinary 
generation, is propagated from Adam, a sinner, is by virtue of his 
conception born a sinner, so Christ, who was conceived, and, as 
it were, propagated by the Holy Ghost, was conceived holy by 
virtue of his conception. For that which the Holy Ghost worketh 
can be nothing else save warmth and fire. 4. By the Holy 
Ghost , signifies that He, in the formation of the Humanity of 
Christ, transposed all His sanctity into It (so far as a creature's 
capacity would allow of such a thing, and so far as a creature can 
become like the Creator), and, as it were, transformed It into 
Himself : so that, next to Himself, He made It to be a pattern and 
prototype of holiness, that from It and according to It He might, as 
it were, express and depict all other holiness, both of all angels, 
and all men. Therefore the Humanity of Christ was the most 
perfect, special, and most holy work of the Holy Ghost, in which 
He Himself constituted a fount of all sanctity, which, by its own 
purity, might wash away the filth of all sins, and, so far as it is 
concerned, sanctify all sinners. 

Moreover, S. Thomas [gumst . 32, art, 2) teaches that the prepo- 
sition “by,” in the expression by the Holy Ghost , signifies that 
Christ is consubstantial with the Holy Ghost, as touching his God* 
head, not as touching his manhood, which He wrought in Christ. 
This, however, S. Augustine denies. 

Then Joseph her husband, being a just man , and not willing to make 
her a public example , was minded to put her away privily . 

I. S. Chrysostom [in loco), S. Augustine ( Epist , 52, ad Macedon.), 
Justin M. ( contra Tryphon .), are of opinion, that Joseph suspected 
evil of the Blessed Virgin, as though she had conceived by 
another man. They think that this is hinted at in the expression, 
make her a public example . But we say, far be any such suspicions 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



3 * 


THE CAUSE 07 JOSEPH'S DOUBTS* 


concerning a virgin so holy, or a man so just. How, indeed, 
could Joseph have suspected adultery in such a wife, or unclean- 
ness in her parents' house ? 

2. Others think that Joseph wished to put away the Blessed 
Virgin out of extreme reverence, because he thought himself un- 
worthy to have to wife one who was with child by the Holy Ghost. 
Whence they are also of opinion that S. Joseph accompanied 
the Blessed Virgin when she visited Elizabeth, and heard her 
saluted as Mother of God, and therefore thought himself unworthy 
of her. This is the opinion of Origen, S. Basil, Theophylact, S. 
Bernard (Horn, 2 super Missus est ). S. Brigit asserts that the 

same was revealed to her (lib. 7, Reoelat . c. 25). Whence Salmeron 
(lib. 3, c. 30) supports the same opinion by thirteen reasons. 

But, 3, plainly and surely, Joseph, seeing the Blessed Virgin 
with child, was astonished at the novelty of the thing, and his mind 
was agitated by contending and fluctuating emotions, and he 
reasoned somewhat in this way : “ I know that this Virgin is most 
holy, wherefore I do not believe that she has been false to her 
troth, plighted to me. Still, she is with child, and I know not by 
me. But by whom I know not. Can it be by a former husband? 
Or can she have suffered violence on her journey, when she went 
to visit Elizabeth? Can she have suffered illusion from some spirit 
during sleep? Or, what would be more consonant with her 
sanctity, is she with child by an angel, or by the Deity Himself? 
Well, however the case may be, I am unwilling to retain her, if 
an angel, or God Himself, desires to have her. Wherefore I will 
resign her, and put her away from me." 

God permitted this to take place in order that the conception of 
the Blessed Virgin by the Holy Ghost might be attested unto all, 
both by Joseph and by the Angel. Thus God permitted S. Thomas 
to doubt concerning Christ's Resurrection, that he, touching Christ's 
very wounds, might bear an irrefragable testimony to the same 
Resurrection. 

Joseph, who was a righteous man, teaches husbands and believers 
not to suspect evil concerning just and holy persons upon slight 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



MODESTY Or BLESSED VIRGIN MARY. 


33 


grounds, but to wait for proofs. They should not be too ready to 
infer guilt, but should put the most favourable construction they 
can upon everything. 

You may ask, why did not Joseph interrogate the Blessed Virgin, 
wherefore, and by whom she was with child ? I reply, that it is 
merely the first thought which arose in Joseph's mind, which is 
referred to, and which, out of modesty, he kept to himself. And he 
was shortly afterwards anticipated by the Angel, who answered 
in behalf of the Virgin, and exonerated him by saying that she 
had conceived by the Holy Ghost. 

The Blessed Virgin was unwilling, of her own accord, to make 
known this divine secret to Joseph, in order that she might not 
seem to boast of her own gifts, so wonderful and so divine; but 
she confided all to God, and God's providential care, most certainly 
trusting that God would defend her good repute and her innocence, 
and either in His own time open out the whole matter, as she had 
seen that He had lately done in the case of her cousin Elizabeth, 
or else would order all things to His own greater glory, and 
therefore to the greater honour and reverence of this, her concep- 
tion. From whence, see here and admire the greatness of soul, 
and the lofty resignation and confidence of the Blessed Virgin in 
God, whereby she put away from her all this peril and fear of 
dark suspicion and infamy. And herein she has given a singular 
example of equanimity and confidence to wives who have jealous 
husbands, that they, too, should put their trust in God, that God 
will make clear their innocence and chastity, will protect them, 
and make them a praise, as he did in this case of the Blessed 
Virgin. Thus S. Jerome says : “This is the testimony to Mary's 
purity, that Joseph, knowing her chastity, and wondering at what 
had happened, hides in silence the mystery of which he was 
ignorant." And S. Ambrose (in Luc . i.) says : “ The Lord pre- 
ferred that some should rather doubt concerning His own 
generation, than concerning His Mother's purity." 

It appears from all this that Joseph did not accompany the 
Blessed Virgin when she, very shortly after her Conception ox 

* D 


Digitized by 


v Google 



34 


WHY JOSEPH WAS MINDED 


Christ, visited S. Elizabeth. For if he had been in her company, 
and had seen and heard the great and wonderful things which 
befell her, they would have removed all his scruples, and he would 
not have thought of putting her away. And especially when S. 
Elizabeth said to the Blessed Virgin: “Whence is this to me, 
that the mother of my Lord should come to me ? ” He would have 
known from thence, that not only had she conceived of God, but 
that she had conceived God Himself, and that she was carrying 
Him in her womb. 

Observe that Joseph is here called just — that is, a man of probity — 
forasmuch as he was one who wished, out of charity, to consult for 
the good fame, yea, even for the dignity of his spouse, when he 
thinks of putting away privily one whom he thought himself un- 
worthy of. S. Jerome and Theophylact think that husbands were 
commanded by the old law to traduce and accuse before the 
judges their wives, if they were guilty of adultery. But they 
adduce no place in which such a precept is given. For the 
passage in Num. v. 2 only permits such a thing to be done, but 
does not order it. 

To make her a public example . Not, to send her away to her own 
house, as Abul. thinks. For the Greek is, xapaSciy/xaTtom — that is> 
to disgrace , to defame , or, as S. Augustine ( Epist . 59, ad Paulinum ) 
says, rendering literally, il to make an example of 99 It was the 
custom in Crete to lead adulteresses through the midst of the 
streets, as they did captives at Rome, that they might be gazed 
at and derided. Whence that ancient punishment by law against 
bawds: “Let bawds and adulterers be caned through the public 
streets of the city, that they may be reviled and derided.” And 
the line of Propertius: “Not even if the infamous one should 
traverse the whole city.” 

Was minded to put her away privily . By the way of secret 
divorce, giving her privily a bill of divorcement, as Abul. says on 
the passage, qucest . 39 ; or rather, and in a more honourable way 
for her, by leaving her on the plea of travel, as going away into 
a far country. So Maldonatus. Whence the Syriac translates: 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


TO PUT HER AWAY. 


35 


“ And he thought of leaving her secretly and the Arabic, u Since he 
did not wish to put her to public shame, he thought upon a private dis- 
missal .” 

But while he thought on these things . He had evidently not resolved 
upon them. For this was his first thought, and, as it were, the 
first motive of his mind. Behold the angel of the Lord appeared unto 
him in a dream, saying, Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto 
thee Maty thy wife, for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy 
Ghost . 

Conceived: that is at one and the same time, conceived, formed, and 
animated, for this is the proper meaning of ywrfiiv — that is, 
begotten, bom . See Abul., quasi. 52, and S. Thomas, 3 part, quasi. 
33 & 34, where he teaches that the Body of Christ was in the very 
instant of its Conception, as regarded all its members, 1, per- 
fectly formed and organized by the Holy Ghost ; 2, animated 
with a reasonable soul ; 3, assumed by the Word. 4. That the 
soul of Christ was filled with all wisdom, and the grace of that 
Headship which flows from thence into all the members — i.e., to 
all the faithful. 5. That the same soul saw God through the 
Beatific Vision. 6. That the same had the use of reason, even 
apart from the Beatific Vision, by means of infused knowledge, 
and that, in this way, It knew that It was hypostatically united to 
the Word, and therefore gave God highest thanks because of this 
vision and exaltation : and that God revealed to the soul of Christ 
His own will, concerning His death upon the Cross, that He 
might thereby redeem and save mankind ; and that the soul of 
Christ forthwith accepted this, and offered himself to God as a 
whole burnt-offering, a victim for sin for the salvation of the world, 
with the utmost humility, obedience, reverence, love, exultation, 
and joyfulness of mind, saying — “ Lo, I come ; in the volume of 
the book it is written of me, that I should do Thy will. Yea, O 
my God, I am content to do it: Thy law is written in my heart." 
(Ps. xxxix. 8, and Heb. x. 7.) 

She shall bring forth a son, and thou shali call his name Jesus , for 
he shall save his people from their sins, If Jesus, as follows from this, 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



36 


MART, MOTHER OF GOD. 


is Emmanuel, that is, God with us ; if He is the offspring and the 
Son of Blessed Mary, as is here said, then she is not only Mother 
of Christ but Mother of God, as defined by the Council of Ephesus 
against Nestorius. For Mother and Son are relative terms. 
Moreover, Valentinus is condemned by this passage, who taught 
that Christ brought down a celestial body from heaven, and passed 
through the Blessed Virgin as through a conduit-pipe. But she 
who bears a son is really the mother of the son ; and furnishes, 
and indeed provides his body and all his limbs. 

Jesus , that is, Saviour. This was Christ’s proper name, here 
foretold by the Angel, but given Him at circumcision, a name which 
signifies and represents His office and dignity — yea, compendiously 
His whole life. 

Now all this was done , that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of 
the Lord by the prophet saying , Behold a virgin shall be with child, and 
shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel, which 
being interpreted is, God with us . The Syriac is : And they shall call 
his name Amanuil, which is explained, Our God with us. The 
Persian has, Immanuil, that is, because God dwelleth in us. The 
Egyptian version — And they shall give him the name Emmanuel, the 
interpretation of which is, for God is with us. S. Matthew to the 
reader, or, as some think, the Angel to Joseph, here brings forward 
the prophecy in Isa. vii. 14, to signify that it was now being ful- 
filled in this Conception of the Blessed Virgin, his wife, and would 
be perfectly fulfilled when she brought forth. And therefore he 
called Joseph the son of David, because the same thing was 
promised by God to David. I have fully expounded this prophecy 
in my commentary on Isa. vii., which see. 

Behold. A word exacting attention, consideration, and admira- 
tion. As it were, “ Behold, O ye angels, and all mankind, see and 
admire a new and wonderful thing, a thing unheard of in all ages. 
For a virgin shall conceive and bring forth Emmanuel, that is, God 
made man.” Whence Jeremiah, overcome with astonishment at 
the same event, exclaims (xxxi. 22), “The Lord has created 
a new thing upon the earth : a woman shall compass a man.” 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



MEANING Or EMMANUEL. 


37 


Cyrus, the first king* of Persia, according to the testimony of 
Xenophon, never admired, and taught his friends to admire nothing 
on earth. For this is the mark of a great and a regal mind, to 
despise all things as being beneath him, as being of less import- 
ance than himself. And Seneca said that a wise man admired 
nothing, because, being above the earth, he despised all things 
lower than himself. But in Divine matters all things are worthy 
of admiration ; because they are great, yea, the greatest things, 
especially the mystery of Emmanuel, because it is the great mystery 
of Divine Godliness, as the Apostle says, I Tim. iii. io. There- 
fore, the goodness of the great God is a thing to be astonished at 
and admired. “Who through the bowels of his mercy visited us, 
the day-spring from on high.” “Behold, therefore, the infant Word, 
the wise Child, the God-Man,” says S. Bernard. Theologians and 
contemplative writers teach that we can consider and meditate 
upon this mystery in various ways, as by the method of compassion, 
of joy, of thanksgiving, of love, of imitation, but most loftily 
by wonder, as though we were always stumbling, amazed and 
astounded at this so great condescension of our God, whereby He 
deigned to descend to us worms of the earth so as to become a 
worm with us ; and this, not for His own sake, but for ours, that 
He might unite men as worms to Himself, and make them gods. 
Thus the Blessed Virgin was amazed, and thus, too, S. Paul, S. 
Bernard, and Francis, and other especially saintly persons, who 
plainly and entirely despised the world, and all the things which 
are in the world, as being petty, briefj and transitory, and fixed 
their whole love, thought, and amazement on the Word Incarnate, 
and had their conversation always with Jesus, despising all other 
things. 

Emmanuel . The Syriac has Amman Elohan — our God with us ; 
but the word our is not in the Hebrew Emmanuel. From the Syriac 
it appears possible that S. Matthew, if he wrote in Syriac (as, 
many think, because the Jews for whom he was writing, in the 
time of Christ spoke in Syriac), interpreted the Hebrew Emmanuel 
by the Syriac Emman Eloha , or God with us. Munster, and 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



38 


THE INCARNATION 


others who have translated the Gospel of S. Matthew out of Latin 
into Hebrew, render the single Hebrew word Emmanuel by two, 
Immanu Elohim . 

Some think that this interpretation was made by the Greek 
translator, who was followed by the Latin. The French shorten 
Emmanuel into Noel, which they duplicate and sing at Christmas- 
tide. Now, the name Emmanuel signifies the Incarnation of the 
Word, and His whole Economy in the Flesh, because by It He 
was properly and physically God with us, by means of His flesh 
and His conversation, and ethically by reconciliation and grace. 
So S. Chrysostom. 

You may say : How is the name Jesus the same as Emmanuel, 
as S. Matthew here intimates? Tertullian (Jib. contra Judceos) 
answers that it is the same in sense if not in sound. For that 
God should be with us is the same thing as that a Saviour — 
Jesus — should be with us. For none other than God could be our 
Saviour. 

Observe the Hebraism by which called is put for be. He shall be 
called Emmanuel , that is, He shall be Emmanuel. This is by the 
figure of speech metonymy, to which the following passages are 
clearly similar : Jer. xxiii. 6, Zech. viii. 3, and Is. ix. 6— “And his 
name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, the Mighty God, the 
Everlasting Father, the Prince of peace.” For all these things 
are signified, either explicitly or implicitly by the name of Jesus. 

Note, also, that Christ is not called by Matthew and Isaiah 
Emmanu Jehovah^ or Emmanu Adoncd or Elohim , though all these 
are names of God, because Jehovah connotes the essence of God, 
or signifies God as He is the first, chief, and uncircumscribable 
Entity, from whom all other entities derive their existence. Adonai 
connotes the dominion of God, and signifies God as He is the 
Ruler, the Judge, and the Avenger of all things. But El con- 
notes the might and omnipotence of God, and signifies God as He 
is strong and omnipotent, because God manifested His utmost 
might and power in the Incarnation, and in Christ, for through 
Christ He hath vanquished His strongest enemies, even the devils, 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



god’s greatest work. 


39 


hell, death, and sin, yea, and all sins and vices, however many and 
however great. Whence, also, the Angel who announced this 
mystery, was called Gabriel — i the strength of God. 

Hence, also, tropologically, observe : God is with us, not only 
in essence, presence, and power, as He is in all and every creature; 
but by the Incarnation He is also with us truly, properly, and 
really, as a Brother, living, speaking with us in the human nature 
assumed by Him. Therefore — 2, He is with us, as a Head with its 
members. For Christ, as the Head of the faithful, causes to flow 
into them spiritual sense and motion, together with direction and 
government. 3. The Same, being Incarnate, is with us in the 
Eucharist, as it were our Food, feeding us with his own Flesh, 
and giving us to drink of His own Blood. So far, physically. 4. 
Christ, ethically, is with the Church as a bridegroom with a bride, 
assisting, protecting, sustaining, adorning, making her fruitful. 
Whence the Psalmist: “Though I walk through the valley of the 
shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me." (Ps. 
xxiii. 4.) Therefore the believer, in every difficulty, labour, or 
tribulation, invokes Emmanuel, that is, God with us, conversant in 
our flesh. And joyfully he cries, “ The Lord is my Shepherd, I 
shall lack nothing. He shall lead me in a green pasture, and lead 
me forth beside the waters of comfort." And, Ps. xxvii. 1, “The 
Lord is my light and my salvation, whom, then, shall I fear ? The 
Lord is the strength of my life, of whom, then, shall I be afraid ? 
Though an host of men encamp against me, yet shall not my 
heart be afraid ; and though there rise up war against me, yet 
will I put my trust in him." And with Paul, “ If God be for us, 
aye, with us, who shall be against us ? " So now, to any believer, 
but especially to a saint or a martyr, it is lawful to say what the 
Angel said to Gideon, “The Lord is with thee, thou mighty man 
of valour." (Judges vi. 22.) 

Then Joseph being raised from sleep , did as the angel of the Lord had 
bidden him , and took unto him his wife: that is, did not put her away, 
but retained her with him, for this was what the Angel commanded 
him. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



40 


HERESY TO DENY 


And knew her not till she had brought forth her first-lorn son ; and he 
called his name Jesus. 

1. S. Hilary, in loc., cited by S. Thomas in Catena, Dionys. 
Carthus., and Gagneius expound as follows: As the Jews were not 
able to look upon and recognize the face of Moses on account of 
the rays of light which God had, as it were, breathed into him 
when He talked with him on Mount Sinai, so neither was Joseph 
able to look upon and to know the Blessed Virgin, forasmuch as 
she had God in her womb, and therefore her face was most radiant 
But after Christ was born, this glory and effulgence left her face, 
and then she could be seen and known by Joseph. 

2. On the contrary S. Epiphanius, Hceresi 30 — that is, his 
treatise against the Ebionites— expounds thus : Joseph knew her 
not in mind. He did not discover the sanctity and the dignity of the 
Blessed Virgin, his wife, until she brought forth Christ But these 
expositions are either incorrect or else symbolical and mystical. 

3. According, therefore, to the true literal meaning, to know 
one’s wife signifies in Scripture the conjugal act. This, therefore, 
is excluded with reference to Christ so as to signify that He was 
not conceived of Joseph, but by the Holy Ghost 

Until. From hence the heretics have taken occasion to say that 
Joseph knew her after she had brought forth her Son. Whence 
they deny that the Blessed Virgin always remained a Virgin, and 
that after bearing her Child she lost her virginity. Thus Helvidius, 
Jovinian, the Ebionites, and the rest of the An tidicomariani, who are 
confuted by S. Epiphanius, S. Jerome, S. Augustine and others, who 
tsach that the word until , in this place, only signifies what took 
place up to the time of the birth, not what happened after the 
birth, which is not here referred to. For by this word until, 
Matthew wished to assert a wonderful thing— a thing hitherto un- 
heard of, and, according to nature, incredible— even the Conception 
of Christ, without a father, by a virgin mother. Similarly, until is 
used, Ps. cx. 2., “ Sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine 
enemies thy footstool," not because Thou shalt not after that sit 
any longer, but because Thou shalt then sit far more gloriously, 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


mart's perpetual virginity. 


41 


as victor and triumphant at my right hand. And in Matthew v. 26, 
" Thou shalt not come out thence until thou hast paid the uttermost 
farthing ; " that is, thou shalt never come out from the fire of hell. 
And 2 Sam. vi. 23, “ And Michal, the daughter of Saul, had no 
child unto the day of her death/’ *>., never. And, Gen. viii. 8, 
concerning the raven, which Noah sent forth out of the ark : *' It 
returned not until the waters were dried up ; " t\e., it never returned. 
Thus, too, we say, “ S. Agnes continued a virgin until death ; 99 t\e. 9 
she always remained a virgin, for she could not lose her virginity 
after she was dead. 

You may urge, S. Matthew says, until she brought forth her first- 
born son; therefore she had other sons, by Joseph, namely those 
who in the Gospel are called the Lord’s brethren. I reply by 
denying the conclusion. For, in Scripture, any one is called a 
first-born son, who has no elder brothers, even though he be an 
only son. This is plain from Exod. iv. 22, and xiii. 2. The 
word “first" denies the existence of any previous sons, but does 
not require, or presuppose, that there were any subsequent. 
Thus, an only son is even now called the first-born. 

Therefore it is a doctrine of the faith that the Blessed Virgin 
always remained a virgin, as is plain from S. Luke i. 34, 
Ezek. xliv. 2, and by the universal consent of the Fathers, and 
the common consent, and perpetual tradition of the Church* (See 
S. Jerome, contra Helvid ., init. tom. 2.) 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



CHAPTER IL 


l The Wise Men coming to Christ, II worship him. 

14 Joseph fleeth into Egypt. 

N OW when Jesus was bom in Bethlehem of Judaea, in the days ot Herod the 
king, behold, there came wise men from the east to Jerusalem, 
a Saying, Where is he that is bom King of the Jews ? for we have seen his 
star in the east, and are come to worship him. 

3 When Herod the king had heard these things , he was troubled, and all 
Jerusalem with him. 

4 And when he had gathered all the chief priests and scribes of the people 
together, he demanded of them where Christ should be bom. 

5 And they said unto him. In Bethlehem of Judaea : for thus it is written by the 
prophet, 

6 And thou Bethlehem, in the land of Juda, art not the least among the 
princes of Juda : for out of thee shall come a governor, that shall rule my people 
Israel. 

7 Then Herod, when he had privily called the wise men, enquired of them 
diligently what time the star appeared. 

8 And he sent them to Bethlehem ; and said. Go and search diligently for the 
young child ; and when ye have found him , bring me word again, that I may 
come and worship him also. 

9 When they had heard the king, they departed : and, lo, the star, which they 
saw in the east, went before them, till it come and stood over where the young 
child was. 

10 When they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy. 

1 1 And when they were come Into the house, they saw the young child with 
Mary his mother, and fell down, and worshipped him : and when they had 
opened their treasures, they presented unto him gifts ; gold, and frankincense, 
and myrrh. 

12 And being warned of God in a dream that they should not return to Herod, 
they departed into their own country another way. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


43 


13 And when they were departed, behold the angel of the Lord appeareth to 
Joseph in a dream, saying. Arise, and take the young child, and his mother, and 
flee into Egypt, and be thou there until I bring thee word ; for Herod will seek 
the young child to destroy him. 

14 When he arose, he took the young child and his mother by night, and 
departed into Egypt, 

15 And was there until the death of Herod ; that it might be fulfilled which 
was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, Out of Egypt have I called my 
Son. 

16 Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men, was 
exceeding wroth ; and sent forth, and slew all the children that were in Bethle- 
hem, and in all the coasts thereof from two years old and under, according to 
the time which he had diligently enquired of the wise men. 

17 Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet, saying, 

18 In Rama was there a voice heard, lamentation, and weeping, and great 
mourning, Rachel weeping her children, and would not be comforted, because 
they are not 

19 But when Herod was dead, behold an angel of the Lord appeareth in a 
dream to Joseph in Egypt, 

20 Saying, Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and go into the 
land of Israel, for they are dead which sought the young child's life. 

21 And he arose, and took the young child and his mother, and came into the 
land of Israel. 

22 But when he heard that Archelaus did reign in Judaea in the room of his 
father Herod, he was afraid to go thither : notwithstanding, being warned of 
God in a dream, he turned aside into the parts of Galilee : 

23 And he came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth : that it might be fulfilled 
which was spoken by the prophets, He shall be called a Nazar ene. 

Now when Jesus was bom in Bethlehem of Judaa in the days of Herod 
the king . It is better to read here in the Greek in Bethlehem Juda, 
Juda means the tribe of Judah, to which, after the schism of the 
ten tribes, who made a king of their own, Jeroboam, the tribe of 
Benjamin adhered. And these two formed the kingdom of Judah. 
S. Matthew adds the word Judah to distinguish the town from 
another Bethlehem, in the tribe of Zebulon, in Galilee. (See 
Josh. xix. 15.) So S. Jerome. 

This was Herod I., the son of Antipater, sumamed the Great, 
and of Ascalon, and an Idumaean by race, whom the Roman Senate, 
on the recommendation of Antony, created the first king of Judaea, 
after its conquest (See Josephus, lib. 14, Ant . c. 18.) 

Matthew makes mention of Herod, to intimate that the sceptre 
was now transferred, from Judah to an alien, for such was Herod, 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


44 MZAKING OF MAGI. 

and therefore that Messiah or Christ was now come. For the 
patriarch Jacob had foretold that this should be the sign of 
His advent. (Gen. xlix. io.) So S. Chrysostom, and Theophylact 
Herod, being aware of this prophecy, applied the oracle to him- 
self in order to strengthen his kingdom. He wished to be 
accounted the Messiah ; and therefore he built a most magnificent 
temple for the Jews, and dedicated it on the anniversary of the 
day when he commenced his reign. (See Josephus, lib. 15, Ant. 
c. 14, and lib. 20, c. 8.) 

Herod Antipas, who beheaded John the Baptist, was the son of 
this Herod the Great. He also it was who clothed our Lord in 
His Passion with a white robe, and mocked Him. And the 
grandson of Herod the Great, by his son Aristobulus, was Herod 
Agrippa, who killed James the brother of John, and who was 
smitten by an angel and died. And the son of this Agrippa was 
Herod Agrippa the younger, before whom Paul the prisoner 
pleaded. (Acts xxv. 23, &c .) 

Salianus, Scaliger, and others, think that Christ was born in 
the thirty-sixth, or last year but one, of Herod’s reign. For he 
reigned thirty-six years. (See on ver. 16.) But Baronius thinks 
that Christ was born in the twentieth year of Herod, Abul. in die 
thirtieth, Bede in the thirty -first, Eusebius in the thirty-second, 
Sulpitius Severus in the thirty- third, Torinellus in the thirty-fourth, 
and others give other dates, so that in a matter of such uncer- 
tainty nothing can be exactly determined. 

Behold \ there came wise men from the east to Jerusalem , saying. 
Where is he that is horn King of the Jews P Wise men , Gr. Magi \ a 
common word among the Persians, whence the Persian translation 
of S. Matthew has here Magusan, Magi , or wise men , or astrologers , 
or philosophers . The word seems to be derived from the Hebrew 
as Genebrard, on Ps. i., thinks, from the root haga to meditate, 
whence Magim, those who meditate. “ For meditation is the key 
of wisdom,” as Ptolemy says in the procemium of Almagestus. 
Hence those who are given to meditation either are, or else 
become, wise. The Chaldees, following the Hebrews, were ac- 


Digitized by ^ooQle 


THE COUNTRY 


45 


customed to call their philosophers Magi, according to S. Jerome 
in Dan, c. 2. Hence the Arabians, Syrians, Persians, Ethiopians, 
and other Orientals, whose languages are either derived from, or 
akin to Hebrew, call their wise men and astrologers, Magi, ac- 
cording to Pliny, lib. 25. c. 2, and Tertull., contra Judceos . 

Came to Jerusalem . 1. Because they thought that the King 

of the Jews must be sought for in the royal city; so S. Leo says. 
2. Because the chief priests, and scribes, and doctors of the law, 
were at Jerusalem, who, from the prophetic oracles, would be 
likely to know where and when Christ should be born, as in fact 
they did inform the wise men that He should be born at Bethlehem. 
For prudently the Magi, although they had the star, wished to 
consult also the living interpreters of God's will. And thus it was 
that the star for a time withdrew itself, as though to compel the 
wise men to approach the Scribes. For it is God's will that men 
should be taught by men, and by doctors appointed by Himself, 
the way of salvation. 

From the east, Gr. ano avaroXurv, t\e., from eastern parts, as though 
these Magi came from several regions or provinces of the east. 

You ask from what country the Magi came ? 

I. Clemens Alex., S. Chrysostom, Cyril Alex., and S. Leo, cited 
by Baronius, think that they came from Persia. But the distance 
would seem too great. For Persia is 300 leagues from Juda?a, 
which the Magi would scarcely traverse in thirteen days. It is 
true that with dromedaries, which can travel forty leagues in a 
a day, the journey might be accomplished post-haste in that time ; 
but those kings, with their luxuries and their litters, were not 
travellers post-haste, and could not perform the distance in any 
such time. And the more common opinion of the Fathers and 
Doctors is that the Magi came to Bethlehem on the thirteenth day 
from the first appearance of the star and the birth of Christ, and 
there adored Him, and that this is the force of the word lot 
Also because they found Christ still remaining with His parents, 
among strangers at Bethlehem, and they, a little after, returned 
with Christ to their own city, Nazareth. This is the opinion of 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


FROM WHENCE 


46 

S. Augustine, Serm. 1, 2, 3, de Epiphan., and S. Leo, de eadm. 
Whence also the Church commemorates this mystery on the 
thirteenth day after Christmas. 

2. Others with more probability think that the Magi were 
Chaldaeans, both because theChaldaeans were addicted to astrology ; 
and these Magi recognized Christ by the teaching of a star, and 
because they themselves were followers of Abraham, who was 
called by God out of Chaldaea into Judaea. So think S. Jerome, 
Chalcidius the Platonic, and Jansenius. 

3. Abul. (in Numb. c. 24), and the Jesuit Sebast. Barradi, think 
that the Magi were Mesopotamians, because Balaam, who pre- 
dicted this star was from thence. 

4. Navarrus ( Tractat . de Oral. c. 21) asserts that he received 
from Jerome Osorius, Bishop of Algarbii, and a celebrated writer, 
that it is found in the very ancient records of Calecut, that the 
king of Calecut was one of the Magi, or certainly a chief associate 
( socium ) of the three wise men. It is credible that this may have 
afterwards been the case when the Magi preached with S. Thomas 
the Apostle, in that place. See Osorius, lib. I, on the actions of 
Emmanuel, king of Portugal, where he asserts from Indian 
traditions that the king of Cranganore, which is not very far from 
Calecut, was one of the Magi : for that the two other Magi, the 
Persian, and the Caramanian, as they were hastening to Christ 
with the star for their guide, associated with themselves this 
Indian king ; and that hence he was called Chereperimale, or 
one of three. He adds that he was nearly black, and like an 
Ethiopian. Maffei has a similar account, lib. 2, Hist. Ind., where he 
calls this prince Pirimal, and asserts that he was king of Calanum, 
and that the star was his guide to Christ by the admonition of the 
Indian Sibyl. 

5. And most probably, these Magi were eastern Arabians. 
Whence Tacitus (lib. 5, His/or.) says that Judaea was bounded by 
Arabia on the east. 

This is proved, 1. Because it was the opinion of S. Justin, 
Tcrtullian, Cyprian, Epiphanius, and others, whom Baronius cites. 2. 


Digitized by L^OOQle 



THE WISE MEN CAME. 


47 


Because this answers best to the prophecy of Isaiah, who foretells 
(lx. 6) that the Sabeans, Midian, and Ephah, who are all 
Arabians, should come to Christ with presents. And it would 
appear that the Church has thus understood Isaiah's prophecy, 
since she so frequently recites it in the office for the Epiphany. 
This is likewise plainly in accordance with the Psalmist : " The 
kings of Tharsis and of the isles shall give presents, the kings of 
Arabia and Saba shall bring gifts." (Ps. lxxii. io.) 3. Because 
Arabia is nearer to Judaea than Chaldaea, India, Persia, &c. 4. 
Because the Queen of Sheba was a type of these kings. And she 
came with similar presents from Arabia to Solomon, a type of 
Christ. And although this queen be said to have come from 
Ethiopia, yet this Ethiopia was not Abyssinia, but a part of Arabia. 
For she came from eastern, not western Ethiopia, as S. Anselm 
says. Arabia includes the Red Sea and the adjacent regions, 
especially the neighbouring part of eastern Ethiopia. So the 
Madianites are called Ethiopians because of their black, or dark, 
colour. Whence Moses' wife is called an Ethiopian woman. 
(Numb, xii.) Also the Red Sea is called the Arabian, not the 
Ethiopian Gulf, because Arabia stretches itself even beyond it. 
Hence again it is probable that one or more of the Magi were 
black, both because this is the universal opinion, as painters thus 
depict the Adoration of the Wise Men, and because the Queen of 
Sheba is said to come from Ethiopia : " And the Ethiopians shall 
fall down before him." (Ps. lxxii. 9, Vulg.) And the Magi are 
called "kings of Tharsis* of the Red Sea." 5. It is plain, 
from the gifts which the Magi offered to Christ : Arabia abounds in 
gold, frankincense, and myrrh. This is why it is called Felix, 
the Happy. "Nowhere is frankincense," says Pliny, "except in 
Arabia." And Virgil, "The frankincense tree belongs to the 
Sabeans alone;" and (2 Geor!) 9 "India sends ivory, the unwarlike 
Sabeans their frankincense." In this Arabia there is also 
abundance of myrrh and spices, so that they use none other than 
such wood for kindling fires. (PKny, lib. 12, c. 17.) In the same 
country there is so great a quantity of gold that their furniture is 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



48 


WHO THE MAGI WERE. 


resplendent with it ; and in Saba of Ethiopia even the prisoners’ 
chains are made of it. (See Mela, lib. 3, c. 10.) 6. Because the 
prophecy of Balaam, concerning the star of these wise men, was 
uttered in the land of Moab, which was a part of Arabia. See S. 
Jerome, in Locis Hebraicis. See also Pineda, lib. 5, de rebus Salomons, 
who shows that the Queen of Sheba came to Solomon, and the 
three Magi to Christ, from Saba, in Arabia Felix, a district 
inhabited by the Homeritae, amongst whom the Christian religion 
afterwards marvellously flourished under Ely Gaan, who received 
it from the kings, his ancestors, who were probably these Magi. 

The common opinion of the faithful is that these Magi were 
kings, that is, petty kings, or princes. And this belief, let Calvin 
laugh as he may, is fully handed down by SS. Cyprian, Basil, 
Chrysostom, Jerome, Hilary, by Tertullian, Isidore, Bede, Idacius, 
who are all cited by Maldonatus and Baronius. S. Matthew, 
however, does not call them kings, but Magi, because it was the 
part of these last to recognize Christ by the star. Hence also in 
Ps. lxxii., they are called ‘'kings of Tharsis," and “kings of 
Arabia and Saba." Again, that they were three in number, from 
the three species of gifts which they offered — gold, frankincense, 
and myrrh, — is taught by Augustine, Serm. 29 A 33, de 
Tempore . The pious tradition of the faithful favours the same 
opinion. And the office of the Church for the Epiphany 
implies it 

The author of the imperfect work upon S. Matthew in S. 
Chrysostom asserts that after the resurrection of Christ, S. Thomas 
the Apostle came to the country of these Magi, and baptized them, 
and associated them with him in preaching the Gospel. 

Venerable Bede, to whom we may well give credit, in his 
Collectanea, not far from the beginning, names and describes them 
as follows : — The first is said to have been called Melchior, an old 
man, grey-headed, with flowing beard and locks; he presented 
gold to the Lord the King. The second was Gaspar, young, 
beardless, and ruddy ; he with frankincense, as an oblation worthy 
of God, honoured God. The third was Fuscus; he had a full 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


CHRIST AS A KINO. 49 

beard, and by means of myrrh signified that the Son of Man 
should die. 

Lastly, some say that these Magi, as they preached Christ, 
were slain by the idolaters, and gained the crown of martyrdom ; 
and offered themselves, as it were, an holocaust of gold and 
frankincense and myrrh to Christ. Amongst these, L. Dexter, in 
his Chronicle, under a.d. 70 , says : “ In Arabia Felix, in the city 
of Sessania, took place the martyrdom of the three Royal Magi, 
Gaspar, Balthazar, Melchior.” From Sessania their sacred remains 
were translated to Constantinople, from thence to Milan, and from 
Milan to Cologne, where they still remain, and are greatly 
venerated, and where I myself have often honoured them. • 

Who is bom King of the Jews . Observe here the faith and great- 
ness of soul of the Magi, who in a royal city seek another King 
rather than the reigning monarch ; nor fear the wrath and power 
of Herod, because they trusted in God. 

The King of the Jews, put antonomastically for Messiah, or 
Christ. Wherefore when Herod heard this question, he gathered 
the Scribes together, and asked them where Christ should be 
born ? For the star was the index of Christ ; whence it is sub- 
joined, “ For we have seen His star.” This is what is meant — 
“The King of the Jews, yea, of heaven, has been born; for a 
star of the heavens has made Him known to us. It has called us : 
it has invited all to visit Him, to honour and adore Him. For in 
this new star which has been put forth in heaven, heaven manifests 
her admiration of so great a King, even the Word incarnate.” 
When Christ is born, the heaven is astonished, the angels are 
amazed, and, wondering at the love of God for man, they sing 
with jubilation, “ Glory to God in the highest,” that so they may 
arouse senseless man to wonder at and venerate so great con- 
descension. So from a like cause, at the passion of Christ, the 
sun and the moon were darkened, the earth quaked, rocks were 
rent, graves were opened, to show that their God was dying, and 
to manifest their sympathy. This is what Haggai foretold (ii. 7) 
— “Yet a little while, and I will shake the heaven and the earth : 

R 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



SO ALL CREATION ' 

and the Desire of all nations shall come/' At this also Habakkuk 
was amazed when he said (iii. 2), “I considered thy works, and 
was afraid. In the midst of the two living creatures thou shalt 
be known " (LXX) — that is to say, in the manger, by the shep- 
herds and the Magi. Wherefore Francis Mayro, in a sermon on 
the Nativity, teaches that the incarnation of the Word was a 
greater and more stupendous work of God than the creation of 
the world. For man is more distant from God than he is from 
nothing. For man is finite, God is infinite^ and, by the incar- 
nation, God is united to man ; but, in creation, man is united to 
nothing — that is, to a body created out of nothing. 

Lastly, from this star, that impostor who, a little after Christ, 
under the Emperor Adrian, feigned himself to be Messiah, gave 
himself a name. He excited the Jews to rebel against the Romans^ 
and became their leader, calling himself Barchochebas, t.e., the 
Son of the Star, saying “ that he, for their salvation, had glided 
down from heaven, as a great star, to bring the help of light to 
diseased mortals, who were condemned to long darkness." Thus 
Eusebius, Hist. 4. 6. But this star soon set, for he and all his 
followers were cut off by the Romans. 

Appropriately did a star lead the three royal Magi to Christ, the 
King of kings, for a star has the appearance of a kingly crown, 
with its resplendent rays; and therefore a star is an emblem of a 
king and a kingdom. Whence God promises to Abraham (Gen. 
xv. 5), saying, “ Number the stars of heaven, for so shall thy 
seed be." Here, amongst other things, He designated the kings 
of Israel and Judah, who should spring from Abraham, but 
especially Christ the King. Hence, unfolding the same thing, 
God says to Abraham explicitly, “ Kings shall come out of thee." 
(Gen. xvii. 6.) Wherefore S. Fulgentius (Serm. on the Epiph . 5) 
says — “ Who is that King of the Jews ? At once poor and rich, 
lowly and exalted, who is carried as a babe, and worshipped as a 
God : a babe in a manger, incomprehensible in heaven, sordid in 
rags, priceless among the stars." 

Hence has been taken that ancient military order of the kings 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



RECOGNIZES CHRIST. 


51 


and princes of France, who bore the figure of a star on their vest- 
ments, with this motto — “The stars show the way to the kings." 
This order was afterwards changed, by Louis XI. of France, into 
the Order of S. Michael. The Order of the Star was first insti- 
tuted by Robert of France, about a.d. 1022 (in honour of the 
Blessed Virgin, to whom that monarch was greatly devoted), 
because she is the very Star of the sea, imploring that she, like a 
guiding-star, might be the leader of his kingdom, and especially 
of the nobles. Wherefore he elected thirty knights of the chief 
nobility of France to be of this Order, and gave to each a golden 
collar, with a star pendant on the breast. (See the “Annals of 
Paris," by Jacob Broneius.) 

For we have seen his star — namely, of the King of the Jews, 
Christ, or the Messiah, newly born. From hence it would appear 
that this star extended its rays with greater length and brightness 
in the direction of Judaea, in the same manner that comets extend 
their tails towards such and such a country ; so that the Magi 
might understand that they were to go in the direction of Judaea, 
where Messiah was to be born. This seems to be the force of the 
word for in this place. Wisely does S. Gregory say {Hon 1. 10) — 
“All the elements testified that their Creator was come. The 
heavens acknowledged Him to be God, and so they sent the star. 
The sea knew Him, for it suffered Him to walk upon it. The 
earth knew Him, for, when He died, it trembled. The sun knew 
Him, for he hid his rays. The rocks and stones knew Him, for 
they were rent asunder. Hell knew Him, for it gave up the dead 
that were in it. And yet Him, whom all the senseless elements 
felt to be the Lord, the hearts of the unbelieving Jews even yet 
acknowledge not by any means to be God, and, harder than the 
flint-stones, they will not be broken by repentance." 

You will ask how the Magi, when they saw the star, knew by 
it that Christ was born ? 

In the first place, the Priscillianists, as S. Gregory {Horn. 10) 
testifies, said that this star was the Fate of Christ; that as fate 
determines things future, so this star signified and determined 

x 2 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



52 


IN WHAT WAT THE MAGI 


Christ But this opinion S. Gregory rightly refutes, saying, “ It 
was not the Child who hasted to the star, but the star to the 
Child. So may it be said, that the star was not the fate of the 
Child, but the fate of the star was the Child who appeared.” 
S. Augustine also (lib. 5, de Civitat. Dei \ c. I, Ac.) confutes the 
astrologers, who say that the stars assign their fates to every one. 

[There follows here a refutation of astrological views, which is 
not translated, as unnecessary in the present age. — Trans.'] 

A second opinion is that of the Imperfect Author. This star, he 
says, was distinguished by the figure of a boy bearing a cross, 
because the light of faith manifested the Incarnation and Cross of 
Christ. But this is said, without foundation. It is not related in 
any history, except that of the Sethiani, of whom presently. 

I say, therefore, that the Magi knew Christ was born by the 
token of a star. 1. Because Balaam had prophesied of it (Numb, 
xxiv. 17), “A Star shall rise out of Jacob.” But the Magi were 
the posterity, or successors of Balaam. The meaning therefore of 
“ Where is he who is born King of the Jews ? for we have seen his 
star,” is, we seek Him whom we all have hitherto expected to be 
designated by a star ; and now, since we have seen the star, we 
believe that He has been born. There is, moreover, this oracle 
of the Erythraean Sibyl extant (lib. 8, Sibyll. orac.) : “ The Magi 
worshipped the Star, recent and divine ; and when they followed 
the commands of God, an infant was shown to them in a 
manger.” 

That the Magi knew that this star was the harbinger of Christ 
from Balaam and the Sibyl, is the opinion of S. Basil, S. Jerome, 
Origen, S. Leo, Eusebius, Prosper, S. Cyprian, Procopius, and 
others, whom I have cited on Numb. xxiv. 17. Whence Suetonius, 
in Vespas ., and Cicero, lib. 2, de Divmai ., and Orosius, lib. 6, c. 6, 
say that it was then a general belief that a King would come 
forth from Judaea who would have universal dominion. This the 
heathen falsely applied to Vespasian. Chalcidius, who was a 
heathen and Platonic philosopher, commenting upon the Timaus 
of Plato, thus writes : “ There is another very sacred and vener- 


Digitized by ^ooQle 


KNEW THE MEANING OF THE STAR. 


53 


able history," meaning the Gospel of S. Matthew, " which tells of 
the rising of a certain star, not one denouncing disease and death, 
but declaring the descent of a God to be worshipped, for the sake 
of converse with man and mortal concerns. When certain wise 
Chaldaeans, in a journey by night, had seen this star, and had 
well considered the circumstance, they are said to have searched 
for the God newly born, and, when they had found the august 
Child, they worshipped Him, and presented gifts suitable for so 
great a Deity." The author of the Imperfect Homily , upon this 
passage of S. Matthew, adds that the successors of Balaam, after 
his prophecy concerning the star, deputed some persons, in each 
generation, to watch the heavens, who might observe the rising of 
this star, on the mountain which is called Victorialis; and at 
length, when these Magi were watching for its appearance, " it 
came," he says, "upon that mountain Victorialis, descending, as 
it were, in the form of a little child, and upon him the likeness of 
a cross. And it spoke with them and taught them, and told them 
to go into Judaea. And as they went, the star went before them 
for the space of two years. And they wanted neither food nor 
drink. But the rest of all the things which were done by them is 
compendiously related in the Gospel." These things, however, 
are of doubtful credit, and are taken from the apocryphal books 
of the Sethiani, as the writer acknowledges. 

2. More probably, they knew by a divine instinct and revela- 
tion ; for the Magi were endowed with a hidden celestial afflatus . 
"This they heard," says S. Augustine ( Serm . 2 de Epiph .), "telling 
them in the language of heaven, as it were, that Christ was born in 
Judaea. Thus they followed the star on to Bethlehem and the cradle 
of Christ" For, as S. Leo says {Serm. 4 de Epiph.), " God, who 
manifested the sign of the star, gave understanding to those who 
beheld it : for He made it to be understood and inquired after, 
and, being sought after, He presented Himself to be found." 

The brightness and majesty of the star were so great that the 
Magi understood that something divine was portended, even that 
God, as the Holy Spirit suggested to them, had become incarnate 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



54 


WAYS IN WHICH THE STAR 


In fine, the Divine countenance of the Child Christ shed forth 
such a ray of heavenly light as illuminated the eyes, but still more 
the minds, of the Magi, so that they perceived that that Infant was 
not a mere man, but true God ; for, as S. Jerome says, on the 
ninth chapter of Matthew, “ The splendour and the majesty of the 
hidden Divinity, which shone even in His human face, were able 
at the first glance to attract those who beheld Him." 

You will ask, secondly, of what kind, and how great was this 
star? Was it of the same nature as the rest of the stars, or was 
it peculiar and diverse from others ? First, the writer concerning 
the marvels of Scripture (lib. 3, c, 40, as extant in tom. 3 of S. 
Augustine's Works), thinks that this star was the Holy Ghost, who, 
like unto a dove, descended upon Christ, and, by means of a star, 
guided the Magi. Origen, Theophylact, S. Chrysostom, and 
Maldonatus think that this star was an angel, because, indeed, an 
angel was the mover, and, as it were, the charioteer of the star. 
3. Others think that it was a real and new star, similar to the one 
which appeared in the Constellation of Cassiopeia, a.d. 1572. 4. 
Others think that it was a comet. But I reply that it was a new and 
unknown star, entirely different from other stars, and superior to 
them in nine prerogatives, and, as one may say, portents. It was 
formed by the angels for this purpose, that it might lead the Magi 
to admire it, that they might feel assured that it presaged some- 
thing new and divine. 

1. This star surpassed all others as to its creation or production. 
For they were produced in the fourth day of the Creation, but 
this was produced upon the very night of Christ’s nativity. It 
was therefore a new star, and was never seen either before or 
after this time. So S. Augustine, lib. 2, conirq. Faustum , c. 5. 

2. In its material ; for in other stars this is celestial, but in this 
it was aerial. For the angels framed it of condensed air, and 
infused brightness into it. 

3. In place : for other stars are in the firmament ; this was in 
the atmosphere. It went before the Magi in their journey from 
Arabia to Judaea. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



SURPASSED THE OTHER STARS. 


55 


4. In motion : other stars move in circles ; but this went 
straight forward. For it moved in a direct line from east to west 

5. In time : other stars only shine by night ; for the sun’s 
light obscures them during the day. But this was as bright by 
day, during the shining of the sun, as it was by night. 

6. In duration : for other stars always shine; this was tempo- 
rary, for it continued only during the period of the wise men's 
journey, and afterwards vanished. 

7. In size : for the other stars are greater than the earth and 
the moon, but this was less than either. This, however, appeared 
greater because it was nearer the earth ; just as the moon appears 
larger than the fixed stars, because it is nearer to us, although it 
is in reality far less. 

8. In being inconstant : for this star sometimes hid itself, as at 
Jerusalem; at other times it was visible, and a guide of their 
journey. When the Magi went forward, it went forward ; when 
they rested, it rested. At length it stood over the house where the 
Child was. And then, as though its work were accomplished 
in Christ’s Epiphany, it vanished. The other stars have no such 
property. 

9. In splendour: in which it surpassed all the other stars. 
Whence S. Ignatius, who lived a little after Christ, in his Epistle to 
the Ephesians^ writes thus : “The star shone so as to surpass in 
brightness all that were before it. For its light was indescribable ; 
and struck with amazement all who beheld it For all the rest of 
the stars, together with the sun and moon, were a kind of chorus of 
audience for that star, for it surpassed them all in splendour.’ 
Prudendus in his hymn for the Epiphany says, “That star which 
surpasses the sun's orb in beauty and radiance.” S. Chrysostom 
says the same thing. Whence S. Leo (Serm. 1 de Epiph.) says, 
“ A new star appeared in the eastern parts to the three Magi. It 
was brighter and more beautiful than all the other stars. It 
attracted to it the eye and the mind of those who beheld it, so 
that it was immediately perceived that this strange sight was not 
without a purpose.” 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



CHRIST THE HORNING STAR. 


S6 

This star was a new meteor formed by the angels from the 
atmosphere, and filled with an immense light, and moved by an 
angel, like the pillar of fire and cloud, which guided the Hebrews 
through the desert to the promised land. So S. Chrysostom, 
Fulgentius, Basil, and others. Indeed, that pillar was a type of 
this star. Truly does S. Chrysostom say ( Horn . 16 ex variis in 
Matth . loc.) “Thou, O star, by thy advent calledst the Magi 
from the east, and sentest them back to preach the gospel in their 
own land." 

Furthermore, in the books passing under the name of Seth, 
the son of Adam, there are various things related of the Magi, 
and of the star in the figure of a child carrying a cross, Ac., 
which seem to have been fabricated by the Sethianist heretics. 
(See Epiphanius, Hares. 26 & 39.) 

Also Gregory of Tours, says Haymo, relates, that this star fell 
into a well, where it may be even now seen, but only by virgins; 
and that once three men came to behold it, and that only one of 
them, who was a virgin, could see it. But such things, says S. 
Anselm, are fables and trifle?. 

Allegorically, Christ is “ the bright and morning star.” (Apoc. 
xxii. 16.) Whence S. Ambrose saith, “Christ is the star: for a 
Star shall rise out of Japob, apd a man come forth of Israel.” 
(Vulg.) Ip fine, where Christ is, there is the star. For He is 
the bright apd morning star : therefore doth He make Himself 
known by Hfs own light. 

Again, thp s|tar of the sep, (that is, pf this sjtprm-tossed world, 
who shows us thereby the way, and goes before us to the harbour 
of safety, is the Blessed Virgin, whence her name Mary. The 
Hebrew Mariam means teacher, or mistress, pr guide of the sea. 
“ Behold the star, invoke Mary,” says S. Bernard. Hence, also, 
the Church invpkes her, saying, “ fiajl, sfar pf the sea, bounteous 
Mother of Gpd.” 

Tropologically , the star is, j. The faith of a believer. 2. 
Prudence. 3. Precepts. 4. Evangelical counsels, especially 
obedience to a superior. 5. Holy inspirations infused into the 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



MARY THE STAR OF THE SEA. 


57 


mind by God, whereby He calls the soul to some action, in a 
more perfect state, as, for example, virginity, or martyrdom. 
God, let us say, calls thee to sanctity and heroic virtue, to a state 
of perfection ; He shows thee a star to go before thee on the road 
to heaven. Gaze then upon it, follow it, lest this star of a divine 
vocation, being seen of thee, be depised, and in the day of judg- 
ment accuse and condemn thee before God. “ There is nothing, 
therefore, too difficult for the humble/' says S. Leo ( Serm . 5 de 
Epiph .), “nothing too rugged for the meek, and all things can 
be accomplished, when grace furnishes her assistance, and 
obedience lightens the command." 

Hear S. Gregory (Horn. 39 in Evang .) : “ Behold God calls 
us by Himself, by the angels, by fathers, by prophets, by apostles, 
by pastors. He calls us also by our own selves, by miracles, 
very often by chastisements. He calls us by worldly prosperity, 
and sometimes by adversity. Let no one despise the call, lest 
the time should ever come, when they will wish to answer and 
not be able.” 

Anagogically , doctors and whoever instruct many to righteous- 
ness shall shine as the stars for ever and ever. (Dan. xii. 3 ; 
and Apoc. ii. 28.) Wherefore S. Leo says, “ Whosoever shall 
live a godly life in the Church, and shall seek those things which 
are above, not which are upon the earth, is like a heavenly 
luminary. And whilst he himself preserves the brightness of a 
holy conversation, he, like a star, shows to many the way of th6 
Lord. In such a course ye all ought, well-beloved, to profit one 
another, that in the kingdom of God — at which we arrive by 
means of a right faith and good works — ye may shine as the 
children of the light.” 

Lastly, the star invites and calls us to heaven, that, by means of 
a heavenly life, we may come to the most blessed company of the 
angels and all the heavenly citizens. 

We have seen his star in /he east . Some writers refer the words* 
in the east to we have seen. That is, “We, being jn the east, saw 
the star in the west, shining over Judaea ; ” that the Magi knew 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



DID THE STAR 


S8 

whither to wend their way. Similarly, the pole-star shows the 
way to sailors. Others, with more probability, refer in the east to 
the word star — /*. e., “ We, in the east, saw the star there with us in 
the east/' But both opinions are tenable. For, first, this star 
seems to have appeared over Judaea to signify that the King of the 
Jews was born there, and must there be sought. Hence, in Num. 
xxiv. 17, for “shall rise " the Hebrew has darach — “ hath pro- 
ceeded." “A star proceedeth out of Jacob." 

You will ask. Did the star remain stationary in the east, or was 
it a constant attendant upon the Magi in their journey to Judaea ? 
Jansen, Cajetan, and others think that it remained stationary. 
They attempt to prove this : 1. Because the Magi say, “We have 
seen His star in the east" And when they departed from Jeru- 
salem, S. Matthew says, “ And lo, the star which they had seen 
in the east." 2. Because Herod, and the Jews, and the rest did 
not, as it would seem, behold the star. For had they done so, 
some surely would have followed it, and have come with the 
Magi to Christ. 3. Because the Magi knew from Balaam's 
prophecy that the star portended that the King of the Jews was 
now bom. And as they knew the way to Judaea, they did not 
require the star to guide them. 

On the other hand, SS. Chrysostom and Leo, Theophylact, S. 
Thomas, Lyra, Suarez, Maldonatus, and Chrysologus (Serm. 156) 
are of opinion that the star did accompany the Magi as far as 
Judaea. As Chrysologus says ( loc . at.), “ When they walked, the 
star went on ; when they sat down, it stayed ; when they slept, it 
kept vigil over them." This is the common opinion of believers ; 
whence the Church sings in her hymn, “The Magi went on 
following the star which they had seen, which went before them." 

So, therefore, when the Magi say, We have seen his star in the east, 
they are speaking only of their beginning to see the star. We 
have seen , meaning “We first saw His star when we were in the 
east ; and, being called by the sight of it, we are come, with that 
star for our guide, having followed it as it went before us until 
we came to Jerusalem." And because the star disappeared at 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



REMAIN STATIONARY? 59 

Jerusalem, they then went to Herod and the Scribes, and asked 
them where Christ was born. 

Both opinions are probable and worthy of examination, and 
may perhaps be reconciled one with the other, by supposing that 
the star which shone in the east was of exceeding brightness, 
as S. Ignatius testifies, at its first appearance, when it attracted 
the eyes of the Magi, and to which they referred when they said 
“ We have seen His star in the east ; ” but that afterwards, when 
it went with them in their journey, it was covered with a cloud, 
and shone less brightly, so that it was visible to scarcely any save 
the Magi ; lest if other men had seen it in its utmost brilliancy, 
and had accompanied them in a great band to Jerusalem, they 
might have stirred up Herod and the Jews against Christ to 
destroy Him. For it was plainly fitting that the star which called 
forth the Magi should show them the way to Christ, who was afar 
off and hidden. In like manner, the pillar of fire and cloud which 
was the leader of the camp of the Hebrews shone before them 
like fire by night, but by day was covered with a cloud, as I have 
shown in my commentary on Exod. xiii. and Numb. ix. 

But that some others besides the Magi saw the star is probable. 
For since the star was a large one, bright and visible to them, 
why not to others ? For God willed Christ to be made known to 
all the world. Still, few or none followed the star with the Magi, 
both because they understood not the mystery, and because they 
were hindered by worldly cares. Hence we learn how necessary 
is powerful and efficacious grace for seeking Christ. Of this He 
speaks (S. John vi. 44) : “ No man can come unto me, except my 
Father draw him.” Thus in the passion of Christ, the eclipse of 
the sun was seen at Athens by S. Dionysius, the Areopagite ; 
and this was why he was converted by S. Paul when he learnt 
from him the cause of the eclipse, because, namely, it was at that 
very day and hour that Christ was crucified. 

Suarez adds, that the star only shone by day in places near the 
Magi, but was at a loftier elevation by night, and was then less 
conspicuous. So says Nicephorus, H. E. 1. 13. 


. gitized by ^ooQle 



bo 


FEAST OF THE EPIPHANY. 


Lastly, the Magi were appropriately called by a star, because 
they were astronomers. Hence they knew that this star was not 
a common one, but a prodigy, and portended some divine event. 
Thus they mderstood that the Maker and Lord of the stars* to 
whom all the stars are obedient, was born. 

Hence the Church celebrates with so great solemnity the Feast 
of the Epiphany, in which the Magi were called to adore Christ, 
because in them and by them was begun the calling and salva- 
tion of the Gentiles. Wherefore S. Leo (Serm. 2 de Epiph.) 
says — “Let us, brethren beloved, recognize in the Magi, who 
worshipped Christ, the first-fruits of our vocation and faith, and 
with exulting minds let us celebrate the beginnings of blessed 
hope. From this time forth we began to enter into our eternal 
inheritance." And S. Augustine (Serm. 2 de Epiph.) says — 
“ This day, on which we keep the anniversary of our festival, 
first shone upon the Magi. They were the first-fruits of the 
Gentiles, and we are the people of the Gentiles. To us hath the 
tongue of Apostles announced it; but to them, the star, as though 
the tongue of heaven. And the same Apostles, as though they 
were other heavens, have declared unto us the glory of God." 

When Herod the king had heard these things , he was troubled \ and all 
Jerusalem with him . Herod was troubled, because he feared that 
he would lose the kingdom of the Jews, now that Messiah, their 
true and legitimate Prince, was born. “ What wonder," says 
S. Augustine, “ that impiety should be troubled at the birth of 
piety ? " ( Serm . 2 de Innocent .) Jerusalem was troubled, as well 

because there were many in it who favoured Herod, as because 
the Scribes and chief Priests, having leisure only for their own ad- 
vantage, and being thus in a state of spiritual slumber, had no 
thought about the coming of Messiah ; that now the sceptre was 
departed from Judah, as Jacob had foretold, Messiah should be 
born. Wisely does S. Gregory say (Horn. 10. in Evangel.), “When 
the King of heaven was born, the earthly king was troubled, 
because, indeed, terrestrial exaltation is confounded when celestial 
greatness is disclosed." “ For," as S, Fulgentius says ( Serm. 1 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


ON THE DIFFERENCES 


61 


de Epiphan .), “ This King came, not to fight against and conquer 
earthly kings, but, by dying, marvellously to subdue them. Not, 
therefore, was He born to be thy successor, O Herod; but that the 
world might faithfully believe in Him.” “ Christ seizes not thy 
royalty,” says S. Leo, “nor would the Lord of the universe be 
contented with thy petty sceptre. He, whom thou wishest not to 
be king in Judaea, reigns everywhere, and thyself wouldst reign 
more prosperously if thou wouldst be subject to His sway.” 

And Herod, as we may see in Josephus, cut off all the members 
of the royal house of Judah, lest there should be any rival to his 
sovereignty. 

And when he had gathered all the chief priests and scribes of the people 
together , he demanded of them where Christ should be bom . He calls the 
learned doctors of the law, the Scribes, who occupied themselves 
in transcribing, reading, and expounding the sacred Scriptures. 
They are sometimes called lawyers ; such a one was Ezra. 

And they said unto him, In Bethlehem of Judcea i for thus it is written 
by the prophet , And thou Bethlehem, in the land of fuda, art not 
the least among the princes of Juda y for out of thee shall come a governor 
that shall rule my people Israel \ 

I have explained this prophecy in my Commentary upon 
Micah v., so that I shall not here repeat it. Only let us observe 
three discrepancies between S. Matthew and Micah. The first is 
that S. Matthew, in speaking of Bethlehem, omits the name 
Ephratah. The explanation is that Bethlehem had two names. 
It was called by its founders Bethlehem and Ephratah, because 
Ephratah was the father of Bethlehem. (See I Chron. iv. 4) ; 
and Ephratah in Hebrew signifies fruitful , or fruit-bearing . Beth- 
lehem has a similar meaning, being house of bread . The literal 
reason why Christ would be born at Bethlehem was that He 
might be accounted David's Son, who was promised to him, who 
was himself born in Bethlehem. The moral reason was to teach 
us humility, to be content with a lowly parentage, a lowly 
country, a humble cottage. Whence S. Leo ( Serm. 1 de Epiph.) 
says — “ He who took the form of a servant chose Bethlehem for 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



62 


BETWEEN SAINT MATTHEW 


His birthplace, that in that obscure place He might hide His 
glory, but Jerusalem for His passion, that He might the more 
make known abroad the shame of the Cross/’ ' He taught us, 
therefore, to cover our glory, to uncover our shame. He here 
taught us that heavenly glory, which is a paradox to the world, 
is, that “ the way to glory is flight from glory.” Christ, who is 
a star — a light and guide to glory and blessedness — hid Him- 
self, and His Godhead and His dignity of Messiah, by abiding in 
the manger of Bethlehem. And therefore God the Father displays 
Him to the whole world, and glorifies Him by means of a star 
shining out of heaven. If, therefore, thou seekest true glory, 
shun fame, court ignominy ; for if thou desirest glory, thou shalt 
lose it ; but if thou despisest it, then, even against thy will, thou 
shalt be had in honour. For this paradox is most true — “ Glory 
follows him that shuns it, flees from him that pursues it, as a 
shadow the body.” “Humility goeth before honour.” (Prov. 
xv. 33.) God exalteth the lowly, and humble th the proud. 
Whence “ Christ emptied Himself and made Himself of no repu- 
tation, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the 
Cross : wherefore also God hath highly exalted Him, and given 
Him a name, which is above every name.” (Phil, ii.) 

2. The second discrepancy is, that for, thou art not the hast, as S. 
Matthew has it, Micah has, thou art a little one {parvulus , Vulg.) — 
t.e.y art the least, or very little . The explanation is that, in Micah, 
an adversative particle is implied from the context, as in Ps. 
cxix. 141, 157, meaning “Very little art thou, O Bethlehem, if I 
look at thy walls, thy citizens, thy buildings, thy fame ; but yet 
very far art thou from being little, if I consider the princes that 
have come from thee, and that have been and shall be born in 
thee. For in thee was born King David, and of thee shall be born 
Christ, David's antitype.” Some read the words in Micah inter- 
rogatively — Art thou very small z 5 That is, Thou art hv no means the 
least , but, by reason of Christ, thou shalt become very great and 
famous. 

3. Instead of among the princes , Micah has, among the thousands . 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



AND MICAH. 


°3 


The explanation is, that the Hebrew aleph denotes both a thousand 
and a prince . But either translation in this place comes to the 
same thing; for, in the princes means among the princes — i.e. t the 
cities, or even the inhabitants of Judah ; this is, from the great 
number of princely men who have, or shall come forth from thee. 
In the thousands . This is the same as among the cities , which contain 
many thousands of people; and therefore they are princes, and 
have their own chiefs, or princes. For the people of Israel was 
divided by Moses into chiliads, or so many thousands of families, 
each of which had their own dukes and princes. (See Exod. xviii. 
25, and Judges vi. 15.) 

Then Herod , when he had privily called the wise men, enquired of them 
diligently what time the star appeared. This he did secretly, in order 
to avoid popular rumours, murmurs, and tumults. For the people 
were expecting their Messiah. It was also that he might more 
thoroughly and reliably find out all the particulars concerning the 
star. He learned from them when the star appeared, that thus 
he might know when Christ was bom, and so, by killing all the 
infants who were born about that date, might slay Christ among 
them. For even already he had determined on the slaughter of 
the infants, in his own mind. Whence the Arabic version hath it, 
“ He was informed by them concerning the time in which the star 
appeared to them." 

And he sent them to Bethlehem, and said, Go and search diligently for 
the young child, and when ye have found him, bring me word again, that 
I may come and worship him also. This was the fox-like cunning of 
a fox. He would make the Magi obedient and faithful to himself, 
by pretending that he wished to worship Christ, when he was 
taking thought how to kill Him. So Caracalla, in order to reign 
alone, slew his brother Geta in his mother's arms, because he was 
associated with him in the empire; and, to extenuate his crime by 
piety, he placed his brother among the gods, saying, “ Let him 
be a god, so long as he is not alive." In like manner, Herod 
saith to the Magi, that he would worship Christ as God, whilst he 
purposed in his mind to kill Him as a man and a king. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


JOY Or THE MAGI. 


64 

And when they had heard the king, they departed \ and lo t the star 
which they had seen in the east went before them , till it came and stood 
aver where the young child was. From hence it would appear that 
the star which shone in the east with great effulgence, after- 
wards, when it accompanied the Magi, appeared less brilliant, 
and, at Jerusalem, was hidden altogether, so as to force the Magi 
to inquire of the Scribes where Christ should be born, that, by 
this means, it might be made known even to them that He was 
born. For Herod and his minions were unworthy of beholding 
this celestial star; for if they had, they would have used their 
knowledge to seek out and destroy Christ. But when the Magi 
departed from Jerusalem, the star again appeared, and shone 
with its former lustre, to indicate Christ, who is the Light — yea, 
the Sun of this world — and by its radiance to point out the very 
spot — that is to say, the stable in which he abode after his birth — 
so that they might not have to wander in vain, searching for Him 
from house to house. 

When they saw the star — i.e. t as brilliant as at first — they rejoiced 
with exceeding great joy . Exceeding great . This is the force of the 
Hebrew gedolah meod. And they rejoiced so greatly because, by 
the star being thus lustrous, they knew that they were come nigh 
to Messiah, and were going to Him in a direct course. 

And when they were come into the house , they saw the young child with 
Mary his mother . From this passage some are of opinion that, 

after their enrolment, the wealthier people, who had come to 
Bethlehem for the purpose, were departed; so that there were 
now many houses in Bethlehem at liberty for the purpose of hos- 
pitality, and that Christ had been removed from the stable in 
which He was born, to some worthier abode of one of the citizens, 
and was there worshipped by the Magi. For it is said, they entered 
into the house . So S. Epiphanius, Hares . 51, Maldonatus, and 
others. 

But the more common opinion is, that the stable in which Christ 
was bom is called the house . For the Hebrews call any place in 
which people live, a house, as Ps. civ. 17. The house — t\e. f the nest, 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



CHRIST IN THE STABLE. 


65 


cf the coot (Ital.) is their leader — namely, of birds and flying creatures. 
For since the census of the whole people proclaimed by Augustus 
was being taken during some weeks and months, and since during 
that period a succession of wealthy people kept arriving for 
enrolment, and afterwards departing, there was no room for 
Mary and Joseph, who were poor people, in the hostelry, until 
the thirteenth day after Christ’s birth. And God ordered this, 
both to try the constancy of the Magi, and to teach them and 
others that Christ’s kingdom consists in poverty, humility, and 
contempt of the world, not in earthly wealth, and pride, and 
pomps, and palaces. So S. Augustine ( Serm . I A 2 de Epiph.), 
Justin, c. Tfyph ., Chrysostom, &c., and Suarez, which latter adds — 
“ It is plain that Christ, and the Blessed Virgin, as a woman who 
had lately given birth to a child, remained in the stable until her 
Purification.” 

Whence S. Jerome ( Epist . 17 ad Marcellam) says, “Behold in this 
little hole of the earth, the Maker of the Heavens is born. Here 
He was wrapped in swathings, here adored by the Magi.” And 
Augustine (Serm. de Epiphan.) says : “ He was lying in a manger, yet 
He led the Magi from the East. He was hidden in a stable, and 
was acknowledged in Heaven j that being recognized in Heaven, 
He might be manifested in a stable.” You may reconcile these 
two opinions with each other, if you suppose that in Bethlehem, 
being a small city, there was only one public hospice for strangers, 
to which was attached a stable for their horses and other beasts 
of burden. And so it is said that the Magi entered into the 
house, or inn, because they went into the stable of the inn. S. 
Luke’s words are in favour of this, when he says : — “ There was 
no room for them in the inn.” This means the common hospice 
of the place. And they found the Babe lying m the manger , plainly, 
the only manger belonging to the stable of this hospice. 

No mention is made of Joseph upon this occasion, either because 
he had gone away into the city or the country, to procure food 
and other necessaries for the Blessed Virgin and Christ. And 
this was in accordance with the Divine purpose, that he Magi 

F 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



66 


THE MAGI RECOGNIZED 


might not suppose him to be the father of Christ, and Christ to be 
born as other children are. Or if he were present, he was sup- 
posed, under the name of Mary's husband, to be the guardian of 
Christ, and the keeper of the stable. And S. Matthew signifies by 
his narrative that the Blessed Virgin and Joseph so conducted 
themselves in the presence of the Magi, that they understood by 
God's inspiration that Christ was born of the Virgin alone by the 
power of the Holy Ghost, and that Joseph only took care of them. 
Wherefore it is not doubtful that the Magi conversed with Mary 
either in Arabic, for she had the gift of tongues, or else in Hebrew, 
through an interpreter, and learnt from her the manner of the 
Conception and Birth of Christ. And therefore they adored Him 
as God and the Son of God, and offered unto Him their threefold 
gifts, but received from Him far greater spiritual gifts for their 
souls, even illumination, consolation, and heavenly warmth. In 
return for their gold, they received the increase of wisdom and 
burning love ; instead of their frankincense, the gift of prayer 
and devotion ; and in exchange for myrrh, zeal for a pure and 
uncorrupt life. 

They fell down and worshipped him . The Arabic has — they fell 
dawn in adoration of him . Erasmus thinks that the Magi did not 
know Christ was God, and therefore did not worship Him with 
latria, but with civil respect, as the King of the Jews. But the 
fathers and interpreters teach the contrary — that the Magi, by 
Divine inspiration, were aware of Christ's Divinity, and worshipped 
It with latria, and that for this reason, they offered Him frankincense, 
which is due to God alone. So S. Irenaeus, lib. 3, c. 10 ; S. Leo, 
Serm. de Epiphan . ; and others passim. Whence S. Fulgentius says 
wisely in his sermon on the Epiphany, “Consider what they 
offered, and you will know what they believed." Hence this day is 
called by the Greeks, Epiphany and Theophany — «>., the appearing 
G f God— because on that day Christ was declared to the Magi to 
be God, and was worshipped by them as God. 

And when they had opened their treasures , they presented unto him gifts, 
frankincense and gold and myrrh . In these things Arabia abounds. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



CHRIST TO BE GOD 


67 


(SeeEzek. xxvii. 22, and Pliny, lib. 12, c. 14.) It was the ancient 
custom of the Arabians and other Orientals, not to approach their 
kings and rulers except with a gift, as it were a tribute due to them. 
(See Gen. xliii. 1 1 ; 1 Sam. x. 27.) Whence Seneca says (Epist. 1 7), 
“ No one may salute the monarchs of Parthia without a present." 
Moreover, it was God’s law (Exod. xxiii.), “ Thou shalt not appear 
before me empty." Lastly, the Queen of Sheba gave precious gifts 
to Solomon, and received greater from him. Thus it was with the 
Magi and Christ, who is the true Solomon. 

S. Bernard thinks that the Magi offered gold to the Blessed 
Virgin and Christ to succour their poverty, myrrh to strengthen 
Christ’s infant limbs, frankincense to prevent the unpleasant odours 
of the stable. This is a very literal and undignified sense. For 
the fathers teach, passim, in a far higher way, that illuminated by 
the Holy Ghost they offered gold to Christ as the most wise King; 
for wisdom is compared to gold (Prov. viii. 19) ; frankincense as 
to God, and according to His humanity, as the High Priest and 
Pontiff ; Myrrh to Christ as man, about to die an t be buried for 
the redemption of the human race, and the third day to rise 
again to immortality and eternal glory. For the bodies of the 
dead are buried with myrrh, that they may remain incorrupt. 
Myrrh has the property of drying up moisture, and preventing the 
generation of worms. So S. Leo says, “ Frankincense they offer 
to God, myrrh to man, gold to the king, wisely venerating the 
Divine and Human Nature joined in one. What they believe in 
their hearts they show forth by their gifts." 

AndS. Ambrose says — “Gold for a king, frankincense for God, 
myrrh for the dead." And S. Gregory {Horn. 10), “ By gold they 
proclaim a king, by frankincense God, by myrrh a mortal man." 
“ Very beautifully," says S. Jerome, “ does the Presbyter Juven- 
cus in one sentence comprehend the mysteries of the gifts, * Gold, 
frankincense, myrrh, for a king, man, and God.’ " 

Grammarians derive thus (frankincensej from the Greek 0voc*, 
I make an odour, or better, from Ow, I sacrifice, because the first 
sacrifices of primitive men were fumigations of incense. Hence, 

f 2 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


68 


BY OFFERING FRANKINCENSE. 


“ honours of frankincense" meant divine honours. Bede, whose 
words I have already quoted, asserts that the first of the Magi, 
whose name was Melchior, gave gold, Gaspar the second, frankin- 
cense, Balthasar the third, myrrh. 

But others, with more probability, think that each of them 
offered all these their gifts to Christ, and that each, by these 
their gifts, attested their own faith in Christ as being a King and 
God, and about to suffer for man. 

Hence the Gloss says : “ All this was done by divine inspiration 
to signify the regal power in Christ by gold, the divine majesty by 
frankincense, and human mortality by myrrh." 

Allegorically \ these three gifts signify Christ; who offered Him- 
self to God the Father upon the cross as it were gold, since out of 
golden love, even love to man, He immolated Himself ; as the 
myrrh of the very bitter passion of His griefs and torments ; and 
as the frankincense of the highest devotion, submission, veneration, 
and worship. Whence also on the same day of the week on which 
Christ offered Himself upon the cross the Magi offered their three 
gifts to Christ For the tradition is that Christ was born on the 
Lord’s Day. And if from thence you reckon thirteen days you 
will come to the Friday of the following week. For the Magi 
worshipped Him on the thirteenth day after His birth. 

Again, Christ offered three gifts to the Holy Trinity, namely, 
His flesh, soul, and divinity, just as Christians offer to the same 
Triune God acts of faith, hope, and charity. 

Tropologtcally , in the first place, gold is charity, or love, and 
wisdom ; frankincense is prayer and devotion ; myrrh is mortifica- 
tion. Whence S. Gregory says {Horn, io), “ We offer gold, if we 
shine by the light of wisdom ; frankincense, if we are redolent with 
fervent prayer ; myrrh, if we mortify the vices of the flesh. Hence 
in Cant v. 14, the bride says of Christ, the bridegroom : “His hands 
are as gold rings, full of hyacinths." (Vulg.) “ His hands," that 
is, the works of Christ, and therefore perfect They are as rings, 
they may be turned and adapted to every thing good. They are 
golden, because adorned with charity ; full of hyacinths, because 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



MYRRH IS FASTING. 


69 

they breathe the love of heavenly things. Thus the golden works 
of charity make golden hands. As many works of charity as 
thou doest, so many golden rings dost thou put upon thy fingers, 
yea, verily, upon the fingers of Christ “ Good works/' says S. 
Bernard ( de Comers, ad Cleric . , c. 15), are the seed of eternity 
and of eternal glory." The very celebrated painter, Zeuxis, used 
to paint very slowly. Being asked the reason, he replied — “ I 
paint for eternity." Thus also do thou, O believer, work, live, 
paint, for eternity, that thy works may, through all eternity, shine 
in heaven before God, the angels, and the blessed. That frankin- 
cense denotes prayer, and myrrh mortification, is plain from 
Cant. iv. 7, “I will go to the mountain of myrrh and the hill of 
frankincense." And i. 13, “My beloved is a bundle of myrrh 
unto me." And iv. 14, “ The smell of thy garments is as the 
odour of frankincense," i.e., lifting up prayers and sighs to God. 
41 For/' says S. Gregory, “in all his works he prays, whilst he 
performs all such good works as he is able to do, with the intention 
of arriving at heavenly things." The same says on Cant chap, iii., 
“The holy soul makes its heart, as it were, a thurible to its God." 
Mark the saying of S. Gregory Nyssen., “The cause of sin is not 
to implore the help of God by prayer." 

Again, gold is voluntary poverty. For this poverty is most 
rich, and far more pleasing to God than all the gold in the world. 
Whence the apostle, “ As having nothing, and yet possessing all 
things." (2 Cor. vi. 10.) 

Frankincense is obedience, whereby a man offers his own will 
and intellect, yea, his entire self, to God, as a holocaust of 
frankincense. 

Myrrh is fasting, mortification of the flesh ; and what springs 
from mortification, chastity. Wherefore many think that the 
three vows of religion are here mystically signified : namely by 
frankincense, the vow of obedience; by myrrh, the vow of chastity; 
by gold, the vow of poverty. 

Moreover, by these three gifts three kinds of good works are 
denoted: almsgiving, prayer, and fasting, to which all species 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


70 


MEANING OF THE MAGI 


of virtues may be referred. For almsgiving helps our neighbour; 
prayer worships and calls upon God; fasting steadies a man 
within himself. So then, by means of these three, we offer to 
God whatever good things we have — namely, by almsgiving, our 
works ; by prayer, our souls ; by fasting, our bodies. 

Anagogically , S. Maximus thinks that by gold is signified man's 
redemption, by frankincense the Christian religion, by myrrh the 
resurrection. 

And having received an answer from God (Vulg. : the Greek, 
Xprjo-fwiy signifies oracles ; and the word answer implies, that the Magi 
in a doubtful matter, in the first place asked light of God, and 
received an answer from Him), in a dream , that they should not 
return to Herod, they departed into their awn country another way . 
Cyril, the monk, in his life of the Abbot S. Theodosius, relates 
that the Magi, when they fled from Herod, avoided high roads and 
public hospices, and rested in mountains and caves. “Because/ 1 
he adds, " they had determined not to enter Jerusalem, it was 
difficult for them to return home any other way, just as we 
see now is the case, those who come from Bethlehem pass through 
Jerusalem. ,, 

The author of the Imperfect Commentary cries out in admiration 
of the faith and constancy of the Magi: “O faith ! which contra- 
dicted not the admonition of the angel, nor said, * We have come 
so great a journey ; as we came we feared not the crowds of so 
many cities ; we were not terrified at the face of that dreadful 
king, but we stood before him and confidently proclaimed that 
King who had been born, and we offered unto Him, as God, 
worthy gifts; and now you bid us conceal ourselves like slaves, 
and take to flight, as having come one way and departing another 
way/ But they continued faithful. And as before they were 
not afraid to be known, so now they blushed not to depart in 
secret." 

Tropologically , Herod is the devil, the world, and the flesh, and 
the way to him is pleasure and greed. They, therefore, who pass 
from him to Christ, walk by the other way of the cross and morti- 


Digitized by ^ooQle 



NOT RETURNING 7 1 

fication ; and thus it behoves them to return to their own country 
— that is, the heavenly paradise. 

Hear the author of the Imp. Com. {Horn. 2) : “ He who comes 
from the devil to God must never walk by the way by which he 
went to the devil. Thou wentest by the way of fornication; for 
the future, walk by the way of chastity. Thou wentest by the way 
of avarice ; walk for the rest of thy life in the way of almsgiving. 
For if thou goest back by the way by which thou earnest, thou 
shalt come again under the dominion of Herod, and shalt become 
a traitor to Christ." And S. Gregory saith (Hon 1. 10), “Our 
country is paradise. And when we have known Jesus, we are 
forbidden to return to it by the way which we came. For we 
departed from our country by pride, by disobedience, by following 
things that are seen, by tasting the forbidden fruit. But we must 
return to it by weeping, by obedience, by despising things that 
are seen, and by bridling the carnal appetite. We return to our 
country by another way ; because we left the joys of paradise by 
the way of pleasures, we return to them by the way of sorrows. 

And when they were departed ’ behold , the angel of the Lord appeareth 
to Joseph in a dream, saying , Arise, and take the young child and his 
mother , and dee into Egypt , and be thou there until I bring thee word: 
for Herod will seek the young child to destroy him. Note that these 
things did not happen immediately after the adoration of the 
Magi. Something must be supplied here from S. Luke (ii. 22). 
That is to say, after their departure on the 6 th of January, Christ 
was taken to Jerusalem, and presented in the Temple; this was 
on the 2nd of February. From thence He returned to His own 
country, Nazareth, and from thence He fled into Egypt. So 
Euthymius and Maldonatus, in loc ; also Ammon and Tatian, in 
Harmon. Evangel. Although S. Augustine, and Jansen after him, 
think that Christ went into Egypt from Juda»a, and not from 
Galilee, because S. Matthew here says (ver. 22), that when 
Joseph was returning from Egypt, he was minded to go into 
Judaea. And so they say that he had fled into Egypt from Judaea, 
But S. Matthew does not say this expressly, but, “ When he heard 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


72 


BY THE WAY THEY CAME. 


that Archelaus reigned in Judaea in the stead of his father, Ilerod, 
he was afraid to go thither." This, indeed, intimates that he was 
thinking of going into Jiidaea, probably to Jerusalem and the 
Temple, there to give God thanks for his safe return, as pious 
persons are wont to do. 

The reason why Christ fled into Egypt, rather than into 
Assyria, or any other country is: — I. Because it was near to 
Judaea, and on account of the streams of the Nile, by which it 
was surrounded, and the sea, by which it was washed, secure 
from the attacks of enemies. Hence, when the Jews fled from the 
Chaldaeans and the Assyrians, they went into Egypt. 

2. Because Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the children of 
Israel, from whom Christ was sprung, dwelt in Egypt for two 
hundred years, and were called forth from thence by God, by the 
hand of Moses. And this was a type of the calling back of 
Christ out of Egypt, as S. Matthew adds, That it might be fulfilled 
which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet (Hosea xi.), saying , Out 
of Egypt have I called my son . Especially because the Hebrews 
were delivered out of Egypt by the blood of the Paschal Lamb, 
which was a type of Christ. “ That not without that region the 
sacrament of the one only Victim might be prepared, in which first 
the safe-giving sign of the slaying of the Lamb, and the Passover 
of the Lord, had been prefigured," says S. Leo. (Serm. 3 de 
Epiphi) 

3. Because Egypt was full of idols and superstitions. They 
worshipped dogs, crocodiles, cats, calves, rams, goats, and what 
not? Christ entered into Egypt that He might cleanse it from 
this filthiness, and consecrate it to the true God. Listen to S. Leo 
( Serm . 2 de Epiph.) : “ Then also the Saviour was brought to Egypt, 
in order that a nation given up to ancient errors might now be 
signed for salvation nigh to come, for hidden grace , and that 
she which had not yet cast out superstition from her mind might 
receive truth as her guest." Whence also Isaiah prophesies 
mystically of the same thing (xix. 1), saying: "Behold the Lord 
shall ascend upon a light cloud, and shall enter into Egypt, and 


Digitized by CjOOQle 


THE IDOLS Or EGYPT FALL. 


73 


all the idols of Egypt shall be moved at his presence," And so 
S. Jerome and others relate that the idols of Egypt did, in truth, 
fall down when Christ came into it (See my comment on this 
chapter of Isaiah.) 

Sozomen (lib. 5, c. 20) relates that there was an ancient tradition 
that when Christ entered Hermopolis, a city of Egypt, a lofty tree 
bowed herself down, and worshipped Him as God. Many such- 
like things are told, but because they are taken from an apocry- 
phal book, called the “ Infancy of the Saviour," and from the 
Koran, it would seem that they ought to be rejected, as fabulous, 
or of doubtful credit. 

For Herod will seek the young child to destroy him. The ang^el 
knew this by the revelation of God. He would also conjecture 
the same thing from the disposition of Herod, and his ambition of 
reigning. Herod’s suspicious, cruel, savage disposition is thus 
described by Josephus (lib. 1, de Bell. Jud. c. 19) : His fear made 
him timid, and incited him to every kind of suspicion. And 
from dread lest any who were obnoxious to him should escape him, 
he put to the torture many who were innocent. 

When he arose , he took the young child \ and his mother by night 
(mark his prompt obedience) and fled into Egypt — that Chris* 
might sanctify and bless it by His coming. Hence faith ana 
sanctity so flourished in Egypt that it produced the Pauls, the 
Antonys, the Macarii, and those crowds of monks and anchorites 
who emulated the life of angels upon earth, as is seen in Eusebius, 
S. Jerome, Palladius, S. Athanasius, and the lives of the Fathers. 
Whence S. Chrysostom, in loc ., says, that Christ converted Egypt 
into a paradise. “ Heaven does not shine so brightly with the 
various choirs of the stars as Egypt is illuminated by its innu- 
merable habitations of monks and virgins." And Trismegistus, 
quoted by S. Austin (lib. 8, de Civ. Dei , c. 14), says, “Egypt is an 
image of Heaven, and the temple of the whole world." 

Adrichomius adds out of Brocardus and Saligniac, in his 
description of the Holy Land (page 47, n. 116), on the word 
Dngaddi, that when Jesus fled out of ludaea into Egypt, He took 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



74 


WHY CHRIST FLED 


balsam with Him. For Cleopatra, the friend of Antony, envying 
Herod the possession of such a treasure, obtained from Antony the 
privilege of transporting balsam-plants out of Judaea into Egypt 
(See Josephus, lib. 5, Bell.Jud . c. 13.) This was a just judgment 
of an avenging God, that Herod before was the possessor of the 
balsam, but that when he persecuted the child Jesus, Jesus fleeing 
into Egypt should, as it were, draw the garden of balsam after 
Him. For Jesus is the true and pure balsam of the soul, according 
as it is said, “ Thy name is oil poured forth/' (Cant. i. Vulg.) 
Adrichomius adds, this garden in Egypt is irrigated by a small 
fountain, which has, however, a very copious supply of water; 
and the tradition is, that in it the Child Jesus was often placed 
by the Blessed Virgin, and that the holy Joseph often drew 
water from it, for himself and his holy spouse, when they were in 
Egypt; and that it is therefore held in great veneration by the 
inhabitants of the country. 

Anselm asserts that Christ, when in Egypt, dwelt in a city 
called Heliopolis, or the city of the sun. In short, this flight of 
Christ was a mark, not of fear, but of prudence and fortitude. 
Hear Chrysologus ( Serrn . 50) : 11 So Christ was born that He 
might make man anew ; and that He might recall the fugitives, 
He fled. And if He himself wandered, so that He might call 
back the sheep which was wandering upon the mountains, how 
shall He not flee to bring again His flying people ? " And shortly 
afterwards, “The refuge of all things fled, the help of all things 
lies hid, the strength of all things fears, the defence of all things 
defends not himself." And again — “When the valiant warrior 
flies in battle, it is of design, not fear. When God fled from man, 
it was a mystery, not from dread." 

Tropologically , Christ fled into Egypt that He might teach us 
to despise exile, and that we, as pilgrims and exiles on the earth, 
might pant after and strive for heaven as our true country. 
Whence Peter Chrysologus says (&nw. 1 15), “Christ fled that He 
might make it more tolerable for us, when we have to flee in 
persecution." S. Gregory Nazian. ( Oral . 28) says — “Every land. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



INTO EGYPT. 


75 


and no land is my country.” No land was Gregory's country, 
because heaven was his country. Again, every land was his 
country, because he looked upon the whole world as his country. 
Thus Socrates, when he was asked what countryman he was, 
replied, “A citizen of the world.” S. Basil said the same, as 
Nazian. testifies (Ora/. 20) — “ In every land the brave man is as 
much at home as fishes in the sea.” 

And was there until the death of Herod ’ that it might he fulfilled which 
was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying , Out of Egypt have I 
called my son . He cites Hos. xi. 2. See my comment on that 
prophet, where I have fully expounded the passage. 

Tropologically , S. Chrysostom, in loc., says, that God weaves, as 
it were, a fair and variegated crown out of the prosperous and 
adverse circumstances of the life of Christ and Christians. When 
Joseph saw his wife great with child, he was sorely troubled : 
but forthwith an angel came to him, and put an end to his sus- 
picion, and drove away his fear. Then came the joyful adoration 
of the Magi, but this was followed by the persecution of Herod, 
and the flight into Egypt. 

It cannot be doubtful that when the Egyptians saw the sanctity 
of the Blessed Virgin and Joseph, and had had frequent oppor- 
tunities of converse and intercourse with them, they came to 
know, worship, and love the true God. The Roman Martyrology 
assigns the 7th of January to the return of Christ from Egypt. 
Some say that he was three years in Egypt, some seven, others 
eight. But nothing is certain. 

Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men, was 
exceeding wroth, and sent forth and slew all the children that were in 
Bethlehem, and in all the coasts thereof When Herod saw that the 
wise men did not return, he supposed that they were under a 
delusion, and had not found Christ, and were therefore ashamed 
to return. But when he heard of the things which had happened 
at the Presentation of Christ in the Temple, on the 2nd of 
February, how holy Simeon and Anna had openly professed 
Him to be the Messiah — that is, “a light to lighten the Gentiles, 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


TROPOLOGI C ALLY, HEROD 


76 

and the glory of the people of Israel ” — he then saw that he had 
been mocked by the Magi, and belched forth his burning wrath 
upon all the children. For, as S. Chrysostom says, “Unquench- 
able is the anger which jealousy of the rival of a crown enkindles. 
Like a wounded wild beast, it tears in pieces whatever meets the 
eye, as if the cause of his wounds." 

Herod's inordinate ambition for retaining and augmenting the 
kingdom of Judaea drove him to this horrible infanticide. He 
knew from the Scribes that the time of Messiah was near at 
hand, because the sceptre of Judah was transferred to himself, an 
alien. And he himself was ambitious of the title, and told the 
Jews that he was their promised Messiah. And he built them 
that magnificent Temple, rivalling Solomon's, of which the Jews 
said to Christ, Forty and six years was this temple in building , and 
wilt thou rear it in three days P But vainly did he covet the name 
of Messiah ; for Messias was to spring out of Judah, and was 
the promised son and heir of David. But Herod was sprung 
from the Idumaeans, who were the Jews' constant enemies. Herod 
then, becoming aware that the true Messiah was born, and had 
been indicated to the Magi by a star, destined Him to death. 
And when he learnt from the Scribes that He was born in Beth- 
lehem, but knew not in what family, or house, he slew all the 
infants of Bethlehem. But see here the just judgment of God, 
by which it came to pass that Herod, by that very act, confirmed 
the kingdom to Christ, and took it away from himself. For, as 
a punishment of his wickedness, Herod slew his own sons, who 
would have succeeded him in his kingdom, and in the same year, 
shortly after this massacre of the infants and his son Antipater, 
he himself was eaten of worms, and died just before the Passover. 
Again, Christ escaped the massacre of the infants by flying into 
Egypt ; and from thence, by degrees. His name, and kingdom, 
and glory increased. Yea, the infants slain by Herod out of 
hatred of the Messiah, by their very death attested that Christ 
was born. 

Tropologically , Herod is the devil, who strives to cut ott infants 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



IS THE DEVIL. 


77 


— that is, those who are weak in faith and virtue, also the first 
inspirations from God, and good thoughts, before they have 
become strong and increased. “ Whence if he slay the little 
ones,” says S. Leo ( Serm . 2 de Epiph .), “he appears to himself to 
kill Jesus, which indeed he strives to do without ceasing, whilst he 
endeavours to deprive those newly born again of the Holy Spirit, 
and to kill, as it were, the infancy of tender faith.” 

From two yean old and under \ according to the time which he had 
diligently inquired of the wise men . The Greek is, — cbro Simas — 
i>., from two yean . The Syriac and Arabic give this turn to it, 
from the son of two years. The Egyptian, from two yean and under . 
Thus, also, the Persian version. For, diligently inquired \ the Greek 
has rjKplfiuxrty accurately searched out . 

You will ask why he slew all the children under two years old, 
especially since many are of opinion that Herod slew them 
immediately after the departure of the Magi — as soon, that is, as 
he had heard of Christ's Presentation in the Temple. And this 
was before the Passover, when Christ was three months old? 
Jansen, Maldonatus, Baronius, and others reply, that he did it out 
of his intense fear of losing his kingdom through Messiah, and so 
extended the three months from Christ's birth to two years. If 
you object that Matthew says this slaughter was made from two 
years old and under, according to the time which he had dili- 
gently inquired of the Magi, they answer that the expression, 
according to the time , &c., must be referred, not to the word s,from 
two yean old, but to, from under, so as to signify that Herod made, 
not a beginning, but only a termination of slaughtering the 
children, according to the time which he had inquired of the Magi, that, 
indeed, he should not further kill infants who were born subsequent 
to those thirteen days which had elapsed after the appearance of 
the star which indicated the birth of Christ ; meaning that Herod 
slew all the infants from two years old because he was very 
sagacious and cruel : and below two years old, according to the 
time which he had carefully inquired of the Magi, because he 
excepted only those from slaughter who were born after the time 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


78 


MEANING OF TWO YEARS OLD 


at which the star had declared the birth of Christ; for he felt 
secure that none of those who were born after the star could be 
Messiah, and give him cause of apprehension. 

But it seems scarcely credible that one so ambitious and fearful as 
Herod should have wished to kill infants born two years before the 
appearing of the star, and yet have spared those who were born a 
few days after its appearance, when there would be an equal or 
greater reason for suspecting that Christ might be amongst these 
last, especially in the case of such a very suspicious person as 
Herod. Whence Bede, the Gloss, Dionysius, and Barradi think 
that he killed the little infants who were born after as well as before 
the appearing of the star. But why did he slay infants born almost 
two years before the star appeared? for there could be no 
suspicion that Christ was born amongst them. So that to kill 
them would have been not merely inhuman, but altogether foolish 
and brutish, and could have had no other effect than to expose 
him to universal infamy and execration — yea, to raise up every 
one in arms against him as an intolerable tyrant, and more like 
a wild beast than a human being. 

I maintain, therefore, that not immediately, nor even in the 
same year in which the Magi came, did Herod put the infants to 
death; but in the following, or second year from the birth of 
Christ. And so the meaning is, that Herod slew the children 
from two years old, that is, who were two years old and under , — that is, 
those who had not yet reached that age ; but who were a year, 
or so many months, or days old. That is, he slew all who had 
been born within two years from the rising of the star, according to 
the time which he had diligently inquired of the wise men. Again, the 
expression, according to the time, &c., might more strictly and pre- 
cisely be taken thus : Herod did not take the whole time of the 
two years, but drew his conclusions from when the star appeared, 
which was the period whence the rising of the star began, but which 
was not completed. For Herod slew the children in the second 
year from the rising of the star, about the time of the Passover, 
or when Christ was about a year and three months old. Where- 


Digitized by ^ooQle 



AND UNDER, 


79 


fore, he did not slay those who were born much before the fifteen 
months since which the star appeared. This is the force of the 
expression, he diligently inquired , in order that he might slay only 
those who had been born about the time when the star appeared, 
and not those who were born much before or much after, that he 
might not, with uselessly barbarous cruelty, slay more than might 
be necessary to secure the death of Christ. 

So that, from two years old and under , Ac., means the same thing 
as those who were fifteen months old. That was the time of the 
appearance of the star, and it continued for thirteen days, during 
which it went before the Magi to Bethlehem. Herod, therefore, 
would only seem to have slain the infants who were about fifteen 
months of age. For he believed the wise men, that Christ had 
been bom at the time when his birth had been indicated by the 
star, and neither much before nor yet much after. So that he did 
not desire that any should be slain except such as were bom about 
the time of the star's appearance. And hence we may gather that 
the expression, from two years old and under , should be taken, not 
disjunctively, but unitedly, as when we say, “Two and three are 
five; ” “All the planets are seven," Ac. 

That this murder of the Innocents took place, not in the third 
month, but after the commencement of the second year, or about 
fifteen months from the birth of Christ, is the common opinion ot 
Eusebius (in his Chronicle ), Epiphanius (Hares. 30), S. Augustine 
( Serm . de Epiphi ), Encherius, Cedrinus, S. Anselm, Haymo, Hugo 
Victor, S. Thomas, Ac. But some of these have not correctly dis- 
tinguished either the rising of the star from the birth of Christ 
(for they say that it appeared to the Magi two years before 
Christ's birth, as SS. Augustine and Chrysostom) ; or the birth of 
Christ and the appearance of the star from the adoration of the 
Magi ; for they say that on account of the length of the journey, 
they arrived at Bethlehem, and worshipped Christ there, two 
years after His birth. So S. Epiphanius (lib. 2, Hares. 30, contra 
Ebionaos), and the Imperfect Author; for it is far more pro- 
bable that the star arose at the same time that Christ was born, 


Digitized by 


Google 



So 


TIME OF THE INFANTICIDE. 


that it might be, as it were, an indicator and stcndard-bearer of 
that event, and that the Magi came to Bethlehem in the same year 
in which the birth of Christ took place, — indeed thirteen days 
afterwards ; and that Herod put off the infanticide, which he had 
already planned in his mind, until the year following, for reasons 
which I shall assign presently. The obvious meaning of S. 
Matthew's narrative, and especially the expression, from two years 
old y require this meaning. Also the number of events which hap- 
pened after the Adoration, and before the Flight into Egypt, 
require the same sense ; for after the departure of the Magi, Christ 
was presented in the Temple on the 2nd of February. After that 
He went and dwelt in Nazareth, and from that place fled into 
Egypt, as is clear from S. Luke (ii. 22 — 39). And all this would 
occupy many weeks, or rather months. 

What Nicephorus (lib. I, c. 14) and Cedrinus say is in favour of 
this opinion. They say that S. John Baptist, on account of this 
persecution, fled into the wilderness when he was in his second 
year, that is, — when he was not quite two years old. For the 
Baptist was born six months before Christ ; so that, at the time 
of the Infanticide, he was a year and nine months old. Whence 
Nicephorus relates : “ When John was a year and a half old, he 
was preserved in safety, with his mother Elizabeth, in a cave in 
the mountains, probably to escape the bloody hand of Herod.” 

Again, Macrobius says, not from two years old, but under two 
years, the infants were slain by Herod. Those who were fifteen 
months would be under two years old. In addition to this, 
Lucius Dexter says, in his Chronicle : “ In the third year of Christ 
(u.r.c. 754) Herod slays all the male children in Bethlehem 
/ and its neighbourhood.” It was the third year from the birth of 
Christ by beginning the year with the 1st of January. 

You may ask why Herod put off the Infanticide until the second 
year from the rising of the star and the birth of Christ It is 
answered : — 

1. That he might the better, by degrees, inform himself of the 
birth, person, parentage, and dwelling of Christ. S« the Gloss. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



I1ER0D DELAYS THE MASSACRE. 


8l 


Again, because he sought by all means to avoid the impu- 
tation of such hateful cruelty, by finding and killing Christ alone. 
S. Matthew appears to intimate this (ver. 13). So S. Augustine 
(lib. de C omens. Evang. 2, c. 1 2). 

2. Because, as Euthymius, S. Thomas, and Lyra show, Herod, 
towards the close of his life, being accused by the Arabians before 
Augustus Caesar, that emperor three times refused even to speak 
to his ambassadors, although at length with wonderful art he 
appeased Caesar, as Josephus relates, Ant . lib. 17, c. 7, &c. And 
then he sought and obtained permission from Augustus, as it 
would seem, to slay the children ; in which Augustus deserves no 
small blame for giving this permission. So Ruperti, lib. 2 de 
Vic/., c. 2. 

3. He delayed the massacre in order to find out a sure way of 
killing all the infants, that none might be hidden by their mothers 
and so escape. Hence Abulensis thinks that Herod, in the first 
place, ordered the little boys to be enrolled with the name and 
age of each ; and, when he had gathered them together, slew 
them all ; but that he gathered them, not in one place, but in the 
various villages or districts, to each of which he sent executioners 
to seek out, gather together, and slay. Such a thing might be 
easily done amongst the Jews, because they kept very exact 
records of their genealogies, that it might be known that 
Messiah was born, according to Jacob's prophecy of the tribe of 
Judah. Hence, when any child was circumcised, his name and 
parents, and the date of his birth, were set down, just as parish 
priests register the children who are baptized. 

S. Antoninus thinks that Herod instituted a feast for boys, and 
ordered all the mothers to bring all their children who were 
about two years of age, as though they were to receive a 
reward. 

Moreover Herod obtained leave from Augustus to put his own 
three sons, Alexander, Aristobulus, and Antipater to death. 
Whence he slew the first two named some time previously, and 
Antipater about five days before his own death, which happened, 

G 


Digitized by C.ooQle 



82 


NUMBER OF THE INFANTS. 


says Josephus, at the Passover, in the thirty- seventh year of his 
reign. (An/, lib. 17, cc. 10 & 11.) And it was then he slew 
the young children. This we learn from Macrobius who, 
amongst other anecdotes of Augustus, relates this ( Sa/umal. lib. 
2, c. 10) : “ When he heard that the king of the Jews had ordered 
the boys in Syria under two years old to be slain, and that his 
own son had been killed, he said, 4 It were better to be Herod's 
pig than his son, because the Jews do not eat pork / 99 

From what has been said, it may be gathered that the infants 
were slain about the time of the Passover, or about fifteen months 
from the birth of Christ. The Church, however, celebrates their 
festival at Christmas, because they were killed for Christ’s sake, 
that she may thus, as it were, magnify and decorate the Festival 
of the Nativity. Barradi, however, and Emmanuel Sa., think 
that they were slain on the anniversary of the very day on which 
the Church keeps their festival. They were slain when Christ 
was in the second year of His age, in spring and in the month of 
March, when their ancestress, Rachel, had died (Gen. xxxv. 16). 
It was about the same time that he ordered his own son Antipater 
to be put to death. He also cut off the Sanhedrim, as the great 
Council of the Jews is called, together with many of the Pharisees, 
because they would not acknowledge him to be king. The rest 
were compelled to take an oath of allegiance. In doing these 
things, he was aided by his father-in-law, Simon the son of 
Boethus, whom he had made high priest. And all was with the 
connivance of Quintilius Varro, the governor of Syria, a friend of 
Herod's. Whence he was not afraid to shut up all the chief of 
the Jews in prison, and would have put them to death if he had 
lived. For just before his own death, he ordered his sister 
Salome, and her husband, Alexas, to kill them, in order, as he 
said, “that the Jews may wail at my death, whether they like it or 
not, since they must weep for their own friends." But Salome, who 
was of a milder disposition, set them all at liberty as soon as 
Herod was dead. So Josephus, &c. 

Some think from the Apocalypse (xiv. 1) that the infants who 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



MARTYRDOM JUSTIFIES. 


83 


were slain by Herod were 144,000, But S. John is speaking- of 
the Virgins who shall resist the lust and persecution of Antichrist, 
even unto death and martyrdom. Neither is it credible that in 
so small a district as that of Bethlehem there were 144,000 boys 
under two years old. What the Abyssinians have in their Canon 
of the Mass, that the number was 14,000 is rather more probable; 
of this opinion are the Jesuit Salmeron, Franc. Lucas, and Ge- 
rebrard (lib. 2, Chronolog. A. C. III.), This last adds, that the 
Greeks give the same number in their Kalendar. And yet it i<? 
hard to suppose that there could be 14,000 infants in so small a 
place, more than are to be found in Rome, or Naples, or Milan, 
or other large cities. 

Note, in the first place, that the infants who were slain by 
Herod, through hatred of Christ, were true martyrs, and as such 
are honoured by the Church, and their Festival kept. And the 
same may be said of all infants who are killed out of hatred to 
the Faith, through the unmerited and bountiful disposition of 
God. 

Whence it follows that martyrdom justifies ex opcre operato , , for 
by it these little ones who had not yet been circumcised were 
cleansed from original sin and justified ; and the same thing was 
wrought which baptism worketh. So the Fathers and Doctors, 
passim , and indeed the whole Church. (See S. Bernard, Serm. de 
Innocent .) Hence Doctors teach that there are three classes of 
martyrs. To the first belong those who, in deed as well as will, 
are martyrs. Such are adults who voluntarily accept death from 
a tyrant for the sake of Christ. The second class are those who 
are martyrs only in deed, such as infants who are slain for Christ 
The third are those who are martyrs only in will — who desire 
martyrdom as S. Francis desired it With this object in view he 
sent to the sultan of Egypt ; but he, seeing him to be a holy 
man, would not kill him. Thus he missed the laurel crown of 
actual martyrdom. 

Note, secondly, the wonderful providence of God, whereby, 
first. He punished the Bethlehemites by the slaughter of their 

6 2 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



8 4 


god’s punishment op 


children, because they themselves would not receive the Blessed 
Virgin, and her Son Jesus with hospitality, but compelled her to 
go into a stable, and there bring forth. Secondly, because by 
means of this massacre, He decorated the boys themselves, who 
were slain, with the laurel of martyrdom. Thirdly, because He 
brought about that Christ should escape by flight into Egypt, 
and should through this slaughter become better known to the 
world. By this “ it was prophetically declared that the Church of 
God should increase by the cruel fury of her persecutors ; since 
by the punishments and deaths of the blessed martyrs, whilst 
Christians were supposed to be diminished in numbers, they were 
augmented by example.” (S. Leo, Serm. de Epiph .) “ And the 

blood of the martyrs is the seed of Christians/' as Tertullian 
observes in the end of his Apology . 

Moreover, Christ as He was man, although an infant, had the 
use of reason. And when the Word, which was united to Him, 
revealed to Him this slaughter of the little children for His sake, 
He grieved, because of the deep sympathy of His tenderness, and 
suffered with them and their parents. But in spirit He exulted 
over their glory and martyrdom. And thus He offered them to 
God the Father, as the first-fruits of His Advent, and the earliest 
oblations of His grace. 

Note, thirdly, God s just vengeance upon Herod for his murder 
of the infants, and as far as in him lay of Christ Himself. For, 
five days after the masacre, he himself breathed out his cruel 
soul ; being smitten with fever, a cough, dysentery, dropsy, gout, 
consumption, the lousy disease, putrefaction, asthma, and such an 
intolerable stench, that he endeavoured to lay violent hands upon 
himself. His sons were not allowed to reign as kings, but were 
only tetrarchs, and perished miserably. Also his entire posterity, 
most numerous as it was, became, with few exceptions, entirely 
extinct within a hundred years, as Josephus relates (Ant. lib. 17, 
c. 8, &c.), who adds that all men were of opinion that it was the 
effect of the just vengeance of God. 

Allegorically , the infants slain by Herod at the Passover, as it 


Digitized by 


Google 



HEROD AND THE BETHLEHEMITES. 


8S 


were Paschal lambs, were a type of Christ, who, thirty-two years 
afterwards, was mocked by Herod, a descendant of this Herod 
the infanticide, and crucified by Pilate at the season of the Pass- 
over, and who offered Himself to God the Father, as it were a 
Lamb and a Paschal Victim, for the salvation of the world. Hear 
S. Augustine (Serm. 8 de Sanctis ) : “When Christ was born, grief 
began, not in heaven, but on earth. To mothers is proclaimed 
lamentation, to angels exultation, to infants translation. He is 
God who is born. To Him innocents are due as victims, for He 
came to condemn the wickedness of the world. Angels ought to 
be immolated, because the Lamb, who taketh away the sins of the 
world is about to be crucified. But the mother-sheep lament, 
because they lose their lambs bleating without speech : a glorious 
martyrdom, though a cruel spectacle." 

And Prudentius, in his hymn, says : — 

“ You, tender flock of lambs, we sing. 

First victims slain for Christ your King! 

Before the Altar’s heavenly ray, 

\\ ith martyr palms and crowns ye play.” 

Symbolically , the children who were slain by Herod in the 
springtime were like vernal flowers put forth in the country of 
Bethlehem by the warmth of the rays of the Sun of righteous- 
ness, and offered to Jesus of Nazareth as the Flourishing One. 
Whence Prudentius in his Epiphany hymn, and the Church in her 
office, sing : — 

“ All hail ye infant martyr flowers, 

Cut off in life’s first dawning hours ; 

As rosebuds snapt in tempest strife, 

When Herod sought your Saviour’s life.* 

And S. Augustine ( Serm. 2 de Innocent.) : “ How happily 
bom were they whom eternal life met on the threshold of exist- 
ence." And (Serm. 3) : “ Rightly are these Innocents called the 
flowers of the Martyrs, whom, in the mid-winter of unbelief, a 
hoar frost as it were of persecution caused to bloom like the 
primal buds of the Church." 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


86 


LOVE OF CHRIST 


And S. Chrysostom (Serm.^ 4) says: “Infancy, unconscious of 
suffering-, bore away the palms and crowns of martyrdom. True 
martyrs of grace! they confess without voice; knowing it not, 
they fight ; .ignorant of it, they conquer ; unconscious, they die ; 
they bear away the palms, they seize the crowns/' 

We see that God made these little ones first to triumph, then to 
live. He adorns them with crowns before He bestows upon them 
perfect members. 

Tropologically , Christ loves infants, that is, the little ones and 
the lowly ; and raises such to the perfection of grace, that is, to 
martyrdom. Hence He Himself says, “Whosoever shall humble 
himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the kingdom of 
heaven.” Hear, S. Leo ( Serm. 7, in Epiphan.) : “Wherefore, 
my beloved brethren, the whole discipline of Christian wisdom 
consisteth, not in a copious flow of words, nor in cunning dispu- 
tation, nor in the desire of praise and glory, but in true and 
voluntary humility, which the Lord Jesus Christ, from His mother’s 
womb even unto the death of the Cross, both chose and taught 
instead of every kind of strength.” And shortly afterwards : “He 
loveth infancy, which at the first He assumed, both in mind and 
body. Christ loveth infancy, the mistress of humility, the rule of 
innocence, the pattern of meekness. Christ loves infancy, which 
guides the manners of elders ; unto which He directs the years of 
old men, and inclines to His own example those whom He would 
lift on high to the eternal kingdom.” And previously : “ The 
whole victory of the Saviour, which overcame both the devil and 
the world, was conceived and completed by humility.” 

Verses 17, 18. — Then was fulfilled , &c. They are nol, because 
indeed, as far as the body was concerned they perished \ in that they 
were slain by Herod ; but as to their souls, they were carried into 
eternity, says S. Hilary. 

I have explained this passage in my Commentary on Jeremiah 
xxxi. 1 5, which see. 

S. Augustine graphically portrays this weeping of the mothers 
(6Vm. 1 de Innocent.), and thus concludes : “The lamentation of the 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



FOR THE LITTLE ONES. 87 

mothers was mingled with the oblation of the little ones, as they 
passed into heaven.” 

Tropologically , Rachel, the sheep, as the word signifies in Hebrew, 
bewails the death of her lambs; but the angels rejoice, yea, even 
the little ones, because their souls passed to the society of the 
angels. • 

Whence S. Augustine ( Serm . 3 de Innocent .) : “ Behold, the 
profane enemy could never have benefited the little ones by 
kindness as much as he did by hatred. And wherefore ? Be- 
cause they received the dignity of eternal life before they received 
the use of time present.” Therefore, in being born, they died unto 
the world; and by dying, they began to live in heaven. To these 
infants are most appropriate those words of S. Paul: “We are 
become a spectacle (Gr. Ocarpov, a theatre) to the world, and to 
angels, and to men.” (1 Cor. iv. 9.) That is to say, in the circus, 
in the amphitheatre, we are seen of all. We are fivoOwaroi , — i.e. 
we are exposed to gladiators and to wild beasts. 

Wherefore consider : by this infanticide God would teach us, as 
by a scenic representation, that the whole of a Christian's life, 
from childhood unto death, is perpetual persecution, the cross and 
death ; and that the fortitude and courage of a Christian consist 
rather in enduring hardness than in doing hard things; in con- 
stant patience than in fighting : for it is more difficult to suffer 
than to act and fight. “ To act bravely,” saith one, “is the part 
of a Roman ; to suffer bravely is the part of a Christian.” When 
Christ suffered for us, He said, “ I gave my back to the smiters, 
and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair. I hid not my 
face from shame and spitting.” (Isaiah 1 . 6.) 

These little ones in their turn, for Christ's sake, gave their 
limbs to be mangled by the executioners. A Christian may do the 
same, and for God's sake give his body for a prey, give it unto 
death, unto labours, unto torments of every kind. Thus did 
S. Eusebius, Bishop of Vercelli, who writes to his flock, “ I have 
given my body to the Arians for a prey.” By them he was tor- 
mented, and became a glorious martyr of Christ, and a defender 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


83 


CHRIST bJeTURNS FROM EGYPT. 


of His Godhead, even unto death. Truly saith S. Fulgentius 
(de Epiph .), “To this end God permitted Herod to slay the infants, 
that He might cause them to triumph over Herod.” Lastly, 
S. Cyprian (lib. 4, Epist . 6 ad Thibarit.} says, “An age not suit- 
able for battle was made fit for a crown. The Son of God 
suffered that He might make us sons of God; and the Son of 
Man wills not to suffer, that He may continue to be the Son of 
God. 

Now when Herod was dead \ &c. (verses 19, 20). Herod died a 
few days after the slaughter of Antipater, as Josephus says, and 
so but a few days after the murder of the Innocents, as is clear 
from Macrobius. Hence Christ does not appear to have remained 
in Egypt more than two years. For He did not go there more 
than one year before Herod’s death ; and after Herod’s death, 
when Archelaus his son had been to Rome and returned, Christ 
came back from Egypt, as the Gospel here states. Thus 
Onuphrius Pavinus, (in his Fasti), and before him S. Epiphanius 
{Hares. 78) ; although Baronius thinks that Christ returned 
from Egypt in the ninth year of His age. 

They are dead \ &c. They , viz., Herod and his sons Aristobulus, 
Alexander, and Antipater, who, it would appear, entered into a 
conspiracy with the Scribes and Pharisees against their father, and 
by consequence against Messiah, and were by Herod put to death. 

Verses 21, 22. When he arose , he took the young child , <Scc. 
Observe, Archelaus reigned as tetrarch, not as king. The angel 
had said to Joseph, Go into the land of Israel . Joseph understood 
Judaea, because that was the most important part of the land of 
Israel, and therein was the temple. Thither, therefore, he 
thought of going to render God thanks for his happy return, 
especially because, by God’s command, all the Hebrew males 
were commanded to go up to the temple thrice a year. Whence 
St. Augustine (lib. 2 de Consensu . Evang . c. 9) : “ The angel 
does not express into what part, that he may return to him 
again, when he is in doubt ; but because he had not told him 
expressly, Joseph understood Judaea, the more worthy part of the 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


ARCHELAUS REIGNS AS TETRARCH. 89 

kingdom : for he thought that with such a boy he might only 
dwell at Jerusalem. But the angel meant Galilee.” 

Moreover, Joseph turned aside into Galilee, although he knew 
that Herod Antipas, the brother of Archelaus, ruled there. He 
did so, both because Archelaus was more ambitious and cruel 
than Antipas, as because the infant slaughter of Herod of 
Ascalon, the father of Archelaus and Antipas, had taken place in 
Judaea, namely, in Bethlehem. Wherefore Archelaus would 
remember it, and would easily perceive that when Christ came 
back to Judaea He had escaped the slaughter, and would there- 
fore again seek to put Him to death. 

Fully to enter into this history ad ovo , as they say, consult 
Josephus, Ant . lib. io, c. 10, et seq. When Herod died, in the 
thirty-seventh year of his reign, two of his surviving sons — 
Archelaus, and Herod Antipas, who clothed Christ in His Passion 
with a white robe, to mock Him — contended together for the 
possession of his kingdom. Augustus entrusted the settlement 
of the dispute to Caius Caesar, his grandson by his daughter Julia, 
who decided as follows — that neither disputant should succeed to 
the kingdom, but that it should be divided into four tetrarchies, 
whose rulers should be tetrarchs, not kings. In pursuance of this 
he assigned Judaea to Archelaus, Galilee to Antipas, Trachonitis 
to their third brother, Philip, Abilene to Lysanias. This is clear 
from Luke iii. I. When, therefore, S. Matthew says, Archelaus 
reigned ’ you must not understand that he was a king, or had the 
title of a king, but of a tetrarch, or toparch, but yet with the 
hope of the kingdom and the kingly name, if he conducted himself 
well, according to the promise of Augustus Caesar. 

After Archelaus had reigned as tetrarch for nine years, he was 
sent into exile for his bad government, thirty-seven years after 
the battle of Actium, and seven before the death of Augustus. So 
Josephus, Eusebius, Scaliger, &c. 

After Archelaus was exiled, Augustus appointed governors of 
Judaea, who ruled it in his name. There were three of those who 
presided over JudaBa during the seven years which elapsed before 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


MEANING OF 


90 

the death of Augustus. The first was Coponius, who, together 
with Quirinus, prefect of Syria, confiscated the riches of Archelaus; 
the second was M. Ambinius ; the third was Annius Rufus. 

From these facts much light is thrown upon the narratives of 
SS. Matthew and Luke. And, in the first place, it is clear why 
Matthew says that Joseph turned aside into Galilee from fear of 
Archelaus, reigning in Judaea. It was lest he, following in the 
steps of his father Herod, should seek to slay Christ, as the King 
of the Jews. In the second place, we see why Christ only went 
up to the temple in Judaea when He was twelve years old: 
Archelaus had been then deprived of the tetrarchy, and driven 
into exile. In Archelaus the race of Herod ceased to rule in 
Judaea, and were succeeded by Roman governors, from whom 
Christ had nothing to fear, for they knew Him not, and had not 
heard even His name. 

Ver. 23. — And he came and dwelt ', Ac. S. Mark (i. 24), following 
the Latins, has Na£api7vo$ ; the other Evangelists write No £ap<uos. 
Adrichomius (Descr. Terra Sand a, p. 241, num. 73) gives the 
following account of Nazareth, which he has collected out of S. 
Jerome, Eusebius, Brochard, and others: — “ Nazareth, which is 
interpreted a flower , is a fair and flourishing city of Galilee, not 
far from Capernaum. It is built upon a mountain, which it girds 
like a crown. It is two leagues from Mount Tabor, and three 
days' journey from Jerusalem. Here Blessed Mary, the Flower 
of Virgins, was born ; here Christ, our Lord and Saviour, our 
glory and our crown, like a flower of the field, as Jerome says, 
was conceived and brought up in all virtues, and lived for four- 
and-twenty years. Hence this was His own and His father's 
city; hence, also, He was called Nazarenus , or Nazaraus , and a 
Galilaan ; hence, too, we who now are called Christians were 
anciently called Nazarenes and Galilaeans, as terms of reproach." 

“ Moreover," says Rabanus, “ Galilee is interpreted migration, 
Nazareth a flower , because the more earnestly the Church passes 
over to heavenly things, the more she abounds in the flowers of 
virtues. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



NA&ARENZ. 


91 


That it might be fulfilled — a Nazarene. The name of Nazareth 
does not once occur in the Old Testament Hence we are unable 
to tell whether it were written in Hebrew with zain or tsade. If 
with the former, Nazareth means sanctified \ separate , consecrated ; if 
with tsade, full of flowers, or guarded. 

The question arises, by what prophet, when, and wherefore was 
Christ called a Nazarene ? There are several opinions ; two are 
most probable : — 

1. Christ was called a Nazarene, in Hebrew nazir, or nozeri, 
written with zain, meaning separate, holy , consecrate, crowned, religious, 
because Christ, as man, being separated from every other thing, 
was hypos tatically and wholly united to the Word. For the 
word nazar signifies to separate, to consecrate, to crown. Where- 
fore the religious, under the old law, who separated them- 
selves from wine and from the world, and consecrated them- 
selves to God, were called Nazarites. (See Numb. vi. 2, seq.) But 
that Christ would be holy, and consecrated to God, all the prophets 
foretold, especially Daniel (ix. 24) : “ The Holy of Holies— i.e^ 
Christ — shall be anointed/' (Vulg.) Thus, too, Samson, who was 
a type of Christ, was a Nazarite. (Judg. xiii. 7.) j So, too, was 
Joseph. (Gen. xlix. 2.) And as Joseph, after his imprisonment, was 
made lord of Egypt, so Christ, after His death, was made lord of 
the universe. So S. Ambrose and Ruperti. 

These Nazarites, however, are called in Greek N alapaiot, 
written v(ith alpha ( Nazarcei ) ; but Christ i$ always called 
Nafwpaios, ( Nazorceus ), written with omega, to distinguish him 
from the Nazarites, because he was not a Nazarite by vow, like 
them, but was called Nazarceus, from his country, Nazareth. Christ 
drank wine, which was forbidden to the Nazarites by their vow. 
The above is the explanation of S. Jerome on this passage, and 
of Eusebius (lib. 7, de Demonstrate c. 2, Dem . 5), where he cites 
Levit. xxi. 12, concerning the Aaronic priest, who was a type of 
Christ: “Neither shall he go forth out of the holy place, because 
the oil of the holy anointing of his God is upon him/' Instead of 
holy, as qualifying anointing, the Hebrew has nezar, i.e., consecration. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



92 


KAZARENZ MEANS SANCTIFIED. 


or sanctification with the oil of the anointing of his God. The index 
of Hebrew words usually found at the end of our Bibles, and 
Paul of Burgos, think that the passage which is here cited is Psalm 
cxxxii. 18: “ ‘ Upon him shall flourish my sanctification.” (Vulg. 
— Heb. nizn\ which S. Jerome translates his diadem .) Whence 
also the golden plate affixed to the pontifical tiara, on which was 
inscribed. Holiness to the Lord \ is called nezor, *>., a crown or diadem 
of holiness. (Ex. xxix. 6.) It was a type, yea, an index of Christ 
of Nazareth, holy and crowned. To this the Apostle alludes 
(Heb. ii. 9) : “We see Jesus, for the suffering of death, crowned 
with glory and honour.” On which see my comment. 

Eusebius says, the LXX translate nazer by holy ; Aquila has sepa- 
ration ; Symmachus, untouched . From these, therefore, the name 

Nazarcetis signifies either holy, or separate , or untouched . But some 
of the ancient priests, who were anointed with the prepared oil, 
which was called by Moses nazer \ were named Nazarites from this 
word nazer . But our Saviour and Lord, by His own nature pos- 
sessing in Himself holiness and separation, neither having need of 
any human anointing, still obtained the title of a Nazarite among 
men ; not as though He were so called from any oil named nazer, 
but from the city Nazareth, where He was brought up among 
His own relations, forasmuch as He was a man. Christ, there- 
fore, was a Nazarite, i.e., separated from other men, sanctified, 
consecrated, and crowned High Priest, Legislator, Teacher, 
Redeemer, and Sanctifier of the Universe. 

The letter which is employed favours this opinion. The 
Evangelists always wrote Nazarceus , or Nazarenus , with the letter *, 
which is the one which occurs in the Hebrew nezer and nazir. For 
if Nazarene is derived from TO nezer , with tsade, so as to signify 
flourishing, it ought to be written Nasarene with an s. In all other 
names the Hebrew letter tsade is represented by an s (in the Vulg.), 
as in Bosra, Asor (see Joshua, chaps, xii. and xv., where some 
suppose Asor to be Nazareth), Melchisedech, Sabaoth, &c. On 
the other hand the Hebrew zain is translated by our z , as appears 
from Zabulon, Zacharias, Beelzebub, &c. 


Digitized by i^ooQle 



NASARENE MEANS FLOURISHING. 


93 


Let us add, it is more worthy the dignity of Christ that He 
should be called Nazarene , with the letter zain, i.e., holy, than 
Nasarene , with tsade, that is, flourishing . For in nazer ; *>., holiness , 
the consecration and crown of Christ, man, was the hypostatic 
union, or rather the actual Godhead of the Word, which crowned, 
sanctified, separated to Itself, united, and consecrated the whole 
Humanity of Christ. Lastly, it is in favour of this opinion that S. 
Matthew says, 44 which was spoken by the prophets ," not by the 
prophet ; 44 by which he shows," says S. Jerome, 44 that he was not 
quoting the words of one passage of Scripture, but the sense of 
several." 

2. It is the opinion of others that Christ is called a Nasarene 
from TO neser, with tsade — i.e., flourishing , from flower — or, rather, 
germinating , from germ. For both Aquila and Theodotion, 
according to S. Jerome, render neser in Isaiah xi. 2 by germen. In 
Isaiah xi. 2, the Vulg. has, 44 A flower shall spring up from his 
root," translating the Hebrew neser by flower. Nazarene, there- 
fore, is the same as flourishing or germinating, growing into a 
great and glorious tree, and producing abundant fruit. 

The first reason is that Christ is elsewhere called no¥ tsemach 
— ■!>., germen , which the Vulg. renders Oriens ; the dawn, or day- 
star, as though arising out of the earth. (See Zech. vi. 12; iii. 8.) 
For Christ sprung from the Virgin as an undefiled germen, or 
plant, and pure from every stain of sin. So He flourished with 
every virtue, and scattered the odour of His sweetness far and 
wide. Whence S. Ambrose (lib. de Spirit. Sanct ., c. 5) says, 
44 When a flower is plucked, it does not lose its smell; when it is 
bruised, it increases it" So, when Christ was bruised in His 
Passion, He the more manifested the power of His Divinity and 
His grace. 

The second reason is that in the inscription placed on the Cross 
of Christ, which is preserved in the Basilica of the Holy Cross of 
Jerusalem, in Rome, *TO notseri is written with tsade, not zain. 
So says Pagninus, from ocular inspection. So, too, the Syrian 
and Arabic versions write Nazarene with tsade. And the modern 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



94 


HOW WRITTEN ON 


Jewish Rabbis call Christians Notserim — i,e., Nazarcnes , writing the 
word with tsade. 

I myself have often seen the title of the Cross at Rome and 
carefully inspected it, but the letters are so worn away that I 
have never been able to see that the Hebrew inscription has tsade . 
On the contrary, zain, not tsade , seemed to me to be the letter. 
Bosius (lib. I de Cruce triumph .) has a perfectly exact impression 
of the superscription of the Cross. Examine it, and you will 
agree with me. Besides, this title was written by Pilate the 
Roman governor, or his Roman servants, who had little know- 
ledge of Hebrew, and could not tell whether Nazarene were spelt 
with a tsade or a zain , and certainly would not care for the dis- 
tinction between them. Various commentators, as Rabanus, 
Salmeron, Jansen, &c., write Nazarene with a tsade , and translate 
it flourishing , but most of them seem to have been influenced by 
Pagninus, who said that he had found notseri spelt with a tsade on 
the title of the Cross. 

Both opinions may be conjoined and reconciled with each other 
by saying that if you look strictly to the letters you will find HO 
nezer with zain — that is to say, holiness , consecration, crown ; yet that 
there is an allusion to netser with tsade — *>., a shoot , a flower — for 
these two letters are somewhat akin both in form and sound, and 
are occasionally interchanged both with one another and with 
some other Hebrew letters, as appears in the conjugation 
Hispael. (See Bel lar mine’s Hebrew Grammar.) Wherefore the 
Psalmist conjoins the two (Ps. cxxxii. 18), saying : “ My sanctifica- 
tion (nazer) shall flourish (nazarene) upon him." (Vulg.) So 
also S. Jerome says, u Nazaroeus is interpreted holy” All Scripture 
testifies that the Lord shall be holy. We are able also to use, in 
another sense, what is written in the same words in the Prophet 
Isaiah according to the Hebrew verity, “ Behold a rod shall come 
forth from the root of Jesse, and a Nazarene shall arise out of his 
root." Lastly, as in their letters, so also in their significations 
these two words are closely connected ; for He who is Nazaretius 
— i.*., separated from earthly pleasures — is likewise Nasarceus-- 


Digitized by ^ooQle 



TIIE TITLE OF THE CROSS. 


95 


f>., flourishing- with virtues. Hence some derive the Greek ayios, 
holy from a, not and yfj the earth ; for he who is separated from the 
earth, cultivates heavenly things, and is holy. 

Matthew adds this, because Nazareth was a small and despised 
town. Hence the name of Nazarene seemed both to Jews and 
Gentiles vile and mean, so that on account of it many were kept 
back from Christ, and from acknowledging Him as Messiah. 
Whence Nathanael said to Philip, “ Can any good thing come out 
of Nazareth ? " And Julian the Apostate was wont, in contempt, 
to call Christ " the Galvan/’ and “the Nazarene." When he 
was struck by a dart from heaven, and was about to die, he cried, 
“Thou hast conquered, O Galilaean, thou hast conquered." 

Matthew, therefore, here shows that the name of Nazarene was 
a glorious one, forasmuch as it had been spoken of by the 
prophets, and assigned to Christ many ages previously. 

The sense then is as follows— although Christ was born in 
Bethlehem He was conceived and brought up in Nazareth, a city 
small and obscure, that He might the better elude Herod and his 
posterity when they sought to slay Him, and that He might give 
us an example of humility and contempt of the pomps of the 
world. Whence He was called a Nazarene from the city of 
Nazareth, but so that not only the name Nazarene, but what was 
signified by the name, that is, holiness, should apply to Him. So 
there was in reality fulfilled what Isaiah and the prophets foretold 
concerning Christ, that He was nazir, holy, and nosen) or Nasarceus , 
flourishing with all virtue and grace. 

Consequently, the name of Nazarene, which the Jews and others 
gave to Christ by way of reproach, is most illustrious, yea, a note 
and mark of the true Messiah ; for by this very title the prophets 
indicated and glorified Messiah. 

Tropologically , Christ is a Nazarene, i.e., separated from the world 
and consecrated to God, flourishing with all virtues, and the origin, 
father, and prince of the Nazarenes, that is, the religious, who 
despise the world, and dedicate' themselves wholly to God, that 
they may flourish in virtues, according to those words in Lam. iv. 7. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



96 


MARY SIGNIFIED BY NAZARETH. 


44 Her Nazarites were fairer than snow, whiter than milk; they 
were more ruddy than ancient ivory, brighter than sapphires/* 
(Vulg.) Where see my Comment. 

Salmeron adds, Nazarene is the same as Samaritan, t\e., a 
keeper (for 1Y3 natsar , is to keep, to guard) namely of men ; accord- 
ing to those words of Job, 44 What shall I do unto thee, O thou 
keeper of men ? ” (Vulg.) And Psalm cxxi., 44 He that keepeth 
Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep/’ So, too, Francis Lucas 
says, Nazarene. that is, keeper, preserver, defender. By 
Nazareth, therefore, the Blessed Virgin is represented, of whom 
Christ the Nazarene was born. For she was kept from original 
sin, from the shame of conception, from the corruption and pain 
of child-birth, and from turning to dust after death. For the body 
of the Virgin was not resolved into ashes after her death, as is the 
lot of other bodies ; but it was, together with her soul, taken up 
into heaven. N These things are true, but rather symbolical than 
literal. 


Digitized by C.ooQle 


CHAPTER IIL 


I John preachcih : his ojficet life , , and baptism. 7 He reprehendcth the Pharisees* 
3 and baptiuth Christ in Jordan. 

I N those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the wilderness of Judsea, 

2 And saying. Repent ye: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. 

3 For this is he that was spoken of by the prophet Esaias, saying, The voice 
of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths 
straight. 

4 And the same John had his raiment of camel’s hair, and a leathern girdle 
about his loins ; and his meat was locusts and wild honey. 

5 Then went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judsea, and all the region round 
about Jordan, 

6 And were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins. 

7 But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees come to his baptism, 
he said unto them, O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the 
wrath to come ? 

8 Bring foith therefore fruits meet for repentance: 

9 And think not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to our father 
for I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up children unto 
Abraham. 

10 And now also the ax is laid unto the root of the trees: therefore every tree 
which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the Are. 

ill indeed baptize you with water unto repentance : but he that coineth after 
me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: he shall baptize 
you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire: 

12 Whose fan is in his hand, and he will throughly purge his floor, and 
gather his wheat into the garner ; but he will bum up the chafT with unquench* 
able Are. 

13 Then cometh Jesus from Galilee to Jordan unto John, to be baptized 0/ 
him. 

H 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


98 


CHRIST'S VOLUNTARY OBSCURITY. 


14 But John forbad him, saying, I have need to be baptized of thee, and comest 
thou to me ? 

15 And Jesus answering said unto him, Suffer it to be so now: for thus it 
becometh us to fulfil all righteousness. Then he suffered him. 

16 And Jesus, when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the water : 
and, lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God 
descending like a dove, and lighting upon him : 

17 And lo a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am 
well pleased. 

in those days , &c. This was in the fifteenth year of Tiberius, as 
S. Luke says, when John and Christ were about thirty years of 
age. Matthew passes at once from the childhood of Christ to His 
age of manhood, when He commenced His actual work of preach- 
ing and redemption, for which He had been sent by the Father 
into the world. 

He sent John before Him to announce to the Jews that He was 
the Messiah, lest, if Christ should appear in Judaea abruptly, with- 
out one to point out who He was, or a witness worthy of credit, 
He should be despised of all. 

Christ lived in obscurity, and exercised a workman's craft 
with his father Joseph for nineteen years, to give to the world a 
memorable example of humility. He began to preach in his 
thirtieth year, that He might conform Himself to the customs and 
laws of the Jews. Amongst them it was not lawful for any one 
to execute the office of a doctor or a priest before his thirtieth 
year. Such is the Hebrew tradition, and the same thing may be 
gathered from 1 Chron. xxiii. 3. Hence John began to preach in 
this same thirtieth year, but a little before Christ. 

That Christ should be hid so long in the obscure depths of His 
humility S. Bernard admires when he exclaims ( Serm . 1 de Epiph .), 
“O humility, virtue of Christ, how dost thou confound the pride 
of our vanity I Little enough do I know, or rather seem to my- 
self to know, and yet I cannot know — impertinently and im- 
prudently carrying and manifesting myself— ready to speak, swift 
to teach, slow to hear. And did Christ, when He kept silence 
for so long a time and hid Himself, did He fear vain glory ? 
What could He fear from vain glory who is the True Glory of 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


CLOTHING OF JOHN BAPTIST. 


99 


the Father? He did fear, indeed, but not for Himself. He feared 
for us that which He knew was to be feared by us. He took 
cautious heed for us, and so instructed us. He kept silence with 
His mouth, but taught by His deeds. And what He afterwards 
taught in words He at this time cried aloud by His example, 
* Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart/ ” 

In the desert . Not in a cultivated and inhabited place. For 
Isaiah (xl. 3), prophesying concerning this desert of John, speaks 
of it as a wilderness. And this is plain from the circumstances. 
We behold John's rough clothing of sackcloth of camel's hair, his 
woodland food, the locusts and wild honey. The motive cause of 
this life was that, as a follower of Moses and Elias, and the pre- 
cursor of Christ, in the desert, removed from the pollutions of 
men, he might converse with God and the angels, and might from 
them derive the power of strength and of the Spirit, and might 
acquire for himself the name and fame of sanctity, that all might 
give credit to him when he pointed out Christ, and, being pricked 
at his preaching, might repent. Whence the Fathers constantly 
call John the prince of monks and anchorites, as S. Jerome (. Epist . 
22 ad Eustoch.), S. Chrysostom, Theophylact, Cassian ( Collat . 18. 
6). Hence John, living in the desert an angelic life with the 
angels, was regarded as an angel by Malachi (chap, iii.) and by 
Christ Himself (Matt. xi. 10) : “This is he of whom it is written. 
Behold, I send mine angel before thy face, who shall prepare thy 
way before thee/’ (Vulg.) 

Symbolically , S. John preaching in the desert signified that the 
Gospel would be preached chiefly, not in Jerusalem and Judaea, 
but in the wilderness — *>., the deserted multitudes of the Gentiles. 
So S. Jerome. 

Tropologically , S. John, by his example, taught that the apostolic 
men and preachers who were about to be, would first retire from 
the tumult of men to have leisure in secret for prayer and medita- 
tion, that they might thereby drink, as it were, from heaven a 
mighty power of the Spirit, which they should afterwards pour 
forth upon their hearers. (See what I have said on Hosea ii. 14 : 

H 2 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


100 


JOHN DWELLS IN A CAVE. 


“I will lead her into the wilderness, and will speak to her heart." 
— Vulg.) To this may be referred what S. Augustine says {Epist. 
7 6) : “ He will not be a good clergyman who has not been a 
good monk." Wherefore SS. Augustine, Martin, Chrysostom, 
Nazianzen. Basil, and many more were taken out of their 
monasteries into the ranks of the clergy, and, even against their 
will, promoted to the episcopate. 

The wilderness of Judcea was near the Jordan, close to /Enon and 
Salim (John iii. 23), and was very famous, both from the abun- 
dance of wrater for baptizing, as well as for being the abode and 
the scene of the miracles of the prophets and religious men who, 
in the Books of the Kings, are called l he sons of the prophets , that 
is, of Elijah and Elisha, and such as they. 

Lastly, Nicephorus (lib. 1, c. 14) asserts that when John was a 
year and a half old he was taken by his mother into the desert. 
Cedrinus adds, that he was concealed in a certain cave, and that 
his mother died there, and that an angel then took care of the 
child. This cave was afterwards frequented by the hermits, as 
appears from John Moschus ( Spiritual Meadow , c. 1), who says 
that the cave was situated near the Jordan, and that by chance 
an abbot, John, who was sick, turned into it, where he was healed 
by John the Baptist, to whom he promised that he would dwell in 
the cave. When the Baptist appeared to the abbot, he said to 
him, “ I am John the Baptist, and I bid thee that thou depart not 
from hence, for this narrow cave is greater than Mount Sinai, for 
into it our Lord Jesus Christ often entered when He visited me. 
Promise me therefore to dwell here, and I will restore thee to 
health." “ When the old man heard this, he willingly promised 
to dwell in the cave; and forthwith he was healed; and he 
abode there unto his life's end. Moreover, he made that cave a 
church, and gathered brethren together there. And the name 
of the place was called Sapsas." 

Saying, Repent ye, &c. John went into the desert, and there did 
penance, and led an austere life that he might be a fitting 
preacher of repentance. S. Gregory Nazianzen strove to imitate 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


MEANING OF REPENTANCE. 


101 


John when he says, “ The office, or rather the service of John, I 
strive to undertake, and though I am not the Forerunner, yet I 
come from the desert." For Gregory went apart with S. Basil 
into the wilderness of Pontus, and there led a hard life, and then, 
being filled with the Spirit, he came forth like another Baptist 
to preach repentance. This was the theme, this the sum of the 
Baptist’s preaching, Repent; because well-nigh all were grievous 
sinners, living in vices and lusts, therefore repentance was neces- 
sary, that they might receive the grace and righteousness of 
Christ. 

Moreover, repentance is not only amendment of manners, and 
the beginning of a new life, as the heretics say, but it is a detesta- 
tion, chastisement, and destruction of the old sinful life, for the 
new life cannot effectually be begun, unless the old life be cast 
away. Whence the Interlinear Gloss thus expounds : “ Let every 
man punish the evils of his former life, because salvation shall 
come nigh, and the opportunity of returning thither from whence 
we have fallen." S. Augustine {lib. dePceniten.) says, u He cannot 
begin the new life who does not repent of the old." “ To repent 
is to weep over sins past, and not to commit what has been wept 
over. He who truly repents, chastises in himself his past errors, 
and lifts up his mind to heavenly things. And this virtue is born 
of holy fear, and is called pcenitentia, penance, from the Latin puni- 
endo , punishing." — Gloss. 

Whence Ausonius sings of penitence : 

“ A goddess I, who punishment exact of things amiss, 

Metanoea I, from penitence I wiss. ” 

S. Gregory {Horn. 34, in Evangel .) says, “ Penitence is the be- 
wailing past sins, and the abstaining from doing that which you 
have bewailed." The Hebrew Dmn hinnachem has the same 
meaning; vii., to repent and grieve over the past. Whence 
God, when He saw the men whom He had created rushing into 
wickedness, repented Him that He had made man upon the 
earth, and it grieved Him at His heart; and He said, “I will 
destroy man, whom I have created, from the face of the earth." 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


f 02 


KINGDOM OK HEAVEN, 


Wherefore the Hebrew Gospel, attributed to S. Matthew by 
Munster, has, less fully, instead of hmnachem and nechumim , *>., “ to 
repent,” and “repentance,” tcschuba , *>., “conversion,” or schuba, 
that is, “be converted to the Lord for repentance is not merely 
turning- to God, but turning away from sin ; also grief, com- 
punction, and satisfaction, as the Apostle teaches (2 Cor. vii. 10), 
and Joel (ii. 12), “Turn unto me with all your heart, and with 
weeping and fasting and mourning.” Whence it is plain that 
repentance must include three duties — sorrow, a new life, and 
chastisement of sins — in order to please God. 

For the kingdom of heaven, &c. In which God reigns in the 
faithful, by grace in this life, and in the life to come by glory ; 
and makes them kings and partakers of His eternal kingdom. 
“John first preached the kingdom of heaven,” says the Gloss , 
“which the Jews had never heaA of,” says S. Chrysostom. And 
S. Jerome says, “John the Baptist first preaches the kingdom of 
heaven, that the precursor of the Lord might be honoured with 
this privilege.” Observe, the Jews expected that their kingdom, 
under King Messiah, would be rich and splendid in their land, 
such as it was under Solomon. S. John, therefore, and after him 
Christ and the Apostles, begin their preaching from the kingdom 
of Messiah, but a kingdom heavenly, not earthly; as though to 
say, “Now is the time of heaven being opened, which Christ shall 
shortly open unto you by His death. Repent ye, therefore, for 
your sins past, correct your lives, be changed for the better, that 
ye may be meet to be taken by Him into His kingdom. Behold, 
now is the accepted time foretold by Isaiah, now is the day of 
salvation, the day when heaven, which has been shut for 4,000 
years, is opened, and they who will may enter into it, if indeed 
they will walk in the path which Christ has pointed out, the path 
of faith, hope, and charity, and a heavenly life, and enter into the 
spiritual kingdom of the Church mttkant, which shall have its 
joyful consummation in the Church triumphant.” Thus Theophy- 
lact and Jansen. Franc. Lucas says, “The kingdom of heaven is 
the dominion of Christ, both over the holy kngels and the com- 


Digitized by ^ooQle 



WHAT IT MEANS. 


103 


pany of those men whose rightly ordered life on earth is obedient 
to God ruling from heaven." 

For this is he, &c. I have commented at length upon this in 
Isaiah xl. 6 , and will not here repeat. 

S. John was the voice of God, 1. Announcing that Christ was 
about to come. 2. Pointing out that He was now born, and 
inviting men to repent and prepare for the grace of Christ. “ By 
the expression, crying f the strength of his preaching is denoted," says 
Raban. Aptly says Bede, “God, indeed, cried by means of others, 
but He Himself is the only Voice, because He shows the present 
Word." “ Prepare therefore the way of the Lord," is the same 
as, “ Repent ye as though “Arouse ye, O Jews, and ye, O inhabi- 
tants of the world, as many as ye be; Christ is about to come, 
and to be installed as Messiah, your King. Make smooth your 
ways, as is wont to be done for monarchs ; take away all things 
which can offend or dishonour Him, that Christ may be freely 
and with longing received by all ; that, indeed, each may prepare 
their hearts and minds, by thorough repentance, for the faith and 
grace of Christ and every kind of holiness." 

The same John, &c. Not the flowing robe, commonly called 
camelots, as Chrytraeus, and those luxurious innovators, who; 
magnificently adorn themselves in the pulpits like the suitors of 
Penelope. For Christ commends John for the roughness of his 1 
clothing. Matt. xi. 8 .) John fled from the halls of Herod, and 
retired into the desert, and preferred a hovel to a palace. His 
garment was cheap, rugged, hairy, and made of sackcloth. 

‘ Yea," say S. Chrysostom and others, “ the clothing of his body 
spoke of the virtue of his soul." Eusebius of Emissa {Horn. 1 de 
Joan.Bapt .) says that John's raiment was made of camel-hair sack- 
cloth, since Syria abounds in camels. By this means he tamed 
his flesh in his youth, like as S. Paul says, “ I chastise my body, 
and bring it under servitude, lest after I have preached to others, 

1 myself should be a castaway." (1 Cor. ix., Vulg.) For sack- 
cloth, by its hairs and pointed bristles, pricking the flesh all over 
as with little needles, mortifies it greatly, and restrains its lust 



Digitized by 


Google 



104 


USE OF SACKCLOTH. 


as they know who have made trial of it. Hence S. -dEgidius, one 
of the first companions of S. Francis, being* asked why S. John, 
who had not sinned, led so austere a life, and did penance, replied, 
“ As flesh is seasoned with salt, that it may not corrupt, so was 
the body of the Baptist seasoned with penance/’ “ Penance," as 
S. Cyprian says (Serm.de ratione Circumcisioms ), “is that penetrating 
salt which dries up the rankling* putrescencesof the flesh." Hence, 
SS. Hilarion, Anthony, Paul, Pachomius, and the rest of the 
Anchorites, according* to the testimony of S. Jerome and others, 
were clothed in hair shirts, or sackcloth, such as the Capuchins 
wear now, and such as was worn by Elijah, Elisha, and the other 
prophets, as I have shown in my Preface to the Minor Prophets. 
In truth, God made for Adam not fine linen or woollen tunics, 
but coats of skin, and rough ones, that by them, as by a 
hair shirt, he might tame his flesh and do penance for his sin, as 
I have shown in Genesis. That is a wise saying of Augustus 
Caesar in Suetonius, “ Soft and splendid clothing is the banner of 
pride and a seed plot of luxury." S. Ephrem concludes his life 
of S. Abraham the hermit thus, “ In all the fifty years of his 
abstinence he never changed the hair shirt which was his clothing." 
S. Clare wore for twenty-eight years, even in sickness, a hair 
shirt made of hogs’ bristles. When S. Josaphat exchanged a 
kingdom for the desert, he wore a hair shirt next his skin, under 
his clothes. (See Damas., in Histor. c. 37.) Theodoret says that 
the emperor, wishing to see S. Abraham the hermit, called him 
to him, and when he came received him with a salutation, and 
regarded his rough sackcloth as of more excellence than his own 
purple. When S. William, Duke of Aquitaine, was converted by 
S. Bernard, he tamed his flesh with an iron coat of mail, and 
armed it against temptation. S. Dominic did the same, and was, 
for that reason, sumamed Loricatus (coated with mail). S. 
Martin, as Sulpitius testifies, was of opinion that it becomes a 
Christian to die on ashes; wherefore, he himself, making his bed 
on ashes, and clothed in sackcloth, so died. SS. Anselm. Charles 
Borromoeo, and many others did the same. 


Digitized by C^ooQle 



FOOD OF S. JOHN. 


ics 


And a leathern girdle, &c. The prophets — indeed, all the Jews and 
Syrians — wore long* robes ; to prevent these flowing down to the 
ground and impeding their walking, they made use of girdles. 
Thus they were more ready for a journey, and more strong for 
work. But John had a girdle of skin about his loins, that it might 
press his sackcloth more closely to his body, and so the more 
mortify his flesh and subdue it to the Spirit. For in the loins is 
the origin of lust. S. John was in this a follower of Elias, whose 
eulogium is that “he was a hairy man, and girt about the loins 
with a girdle of skin.” It is a common saying, “ A girded gar- 
ment, a girded mind; an un girded garment, an un girded mind.” 
As it is said in Ecclus. xix. 27, “A man’s clothing, and excessive 
laughter and gait, shew what he is.” (See S. Chrysostom in loc .) 
And Cassian (lib. i. de HMtu Monach .) thus begins, “ So must a 
monk needs walk as a soldier of Christ, always ready for battle, 
with his loins alway girded.” 

His meat , &c. For locusts the Greek has <jucpt'8<$, which Beza erro- 
neously understands to mean wild pears , for they are not called 
axpffics, but &xp<&€s. *Axpas is a wild pear-tree, a species of thorn. 
(See Columella, lib. 10.) 

A second opinion of certain heretics mentioned by S. Epipha- 
nius, Hares. 30, is also wrong. By <jucpt$c? they understood fycpi'Scs, 
or sweetmeats made of oil and honey. 

Thirdly, certain innovators take <bcpt8c? to mean sea-crabs; but 
these are not called <jucp$cs, but Axaptfe, or xopi'Scs in Athenaeus. 
But where, I ask, could John procure crabs in the desert ? Besides, 


crabs, as crawling on the ground, were forbidden to the Jews. 

Fourthly, some by dxpiScs translate herbs, or the top\ of trees 
and leaves. The Ethiopian has, His food was arant anvoia, the 


tops of herbs with wild honey, or dipped in honey. 

But I say £#cpi8c$ are locusts; so the Vulgate, Syriac, and Arabic. 
The Egyptian translates grasshoppers, but it means locusts, which 
chirp like grasshoppers. And both are so called because thev 
feed upon ra &k pa, i.e. the tops of ears of com and plants. Si 
Theocritus, and the Lexicons, passim . Whence Origen, Hilar)! 




Digitized by Google 



io6 


WILD HONEY. 


Ambrose, Chrysostom, Augustine, understand by the word a kind 
of leaping insect, which is frequently eaten by the Ethiopians, 
Libyans, Parthians and other Orientals. (See Pliny, lib. 1 1, c. 29, 
and lib. 6, c. 30.) Hence S. Jerome (lib. 2 conira Jovin .) says, “ Be- 
cause clouds of locusts are found throughout the vast solitudes 
of the burning deserts, they are used as food ; and this was what 
John the Baptist ate.” So, too, the locust, because it leaps, was 
counted a clean animal, and was allowed by God to be eaten by 
the Israelites. (Levit. xi.) 

Moreover, the ancients were wont to eat locusts, either sodden 
or roasted ; and when dried in the sun, or salted and smoked, 
they would keep for a year. 

Nothing is here said of John's drink, for it is certain that he 
drank water only. Indeed there was nothing else to be had in 
the desert So the angel said of him, “ He shall drink neither 
wine nor strong drink.” 

Wild honey . What sort of honey was this ? First, Rabanus is 
of opinion that it was the white and tender leaves of trees, which, 
when rubbed in the hands, give out a kind of honeyed flavour. 

2. Others think that this honey was a moisture collected from 
the leaves of trees. 

3. Suidas thinks it was the gum collected from trees and shrubs, 
which is called manna. 

4. And rightly, S. Chrysostom, Theophylact, Isidore of Pelu- 
sium, believe that it was wild honey, made by wild bees, which 
they store in hollow trees, and which has a somewhat bitter and 
disagreeable flavour. The Ethiopic version has here, sedence , which 
means a particular kind of honey, sweeter and more wholesome 
than the common honey. It is made by a kind of bee, less than 
the common bee, about the size of a fly. 

Then went out to him . Then, when the fame of his holy and 
austere and eremitical life was everywhere spread abroad. Of 
so great power with all men is sanctity, and the reputation of 
sanctity. 

Now Jordan, in Hebrew, is as though, p p yx* tmd min dan , 


Digitized by CjOOQle 



JOHN'S BAPTISM DIFFERENT FROM CHRIST’S. t 

that is, descending from Dan. Dan in Hebrew signifies judgnf 
Whence the passage denotes, mystically, that they who fear the' 
judgment of God run to holy preachers, such as was John, that 
they may learn from them the way of salvation, and thus, in the 
Day of Judgment, may have their portion in heaven assigned by 
Christ the Judge. 

And were baptized, &c. Unaptly Calvin interprets were baptized to 
mean were taught the baptism of repentance . For to baptize does 
not mean to teach, but to wash the body with water, as is plain 
from verse 13. The baptism of John was different from the bap- 
tism of Christ, as I show against the heretics on Acts xix. 2. The 
baptism of John was only a sign and protestation of repentance, 
and a preparation for the baptism of Christ, that they might be 
justified by it. Hence they were confessing their sins. For 
repentance, or sorrow for sin, causes a man to confess his sins, 
and seek for a remedy for them and for pardon. Thus the Jews 
in certain cases were obliged to confess their sins to a priest, as I 
have shown on Levit. v. 5, and vi. 6, 7, and Numb. v. 7. But this 
confession was not a Sacrament, nor did it procure remission of 
sins, as in the confession instituted by Christ For in that, as in a 
Sacrament, the priest, by the power conferred upon him by Christ 
in ordination, absolves the penitent from his sins. But that con- 
fession of the Jews was only a sign of penitence and compunction, 
or inward contrition, which, if it were perfect, that is to say, pro- 
ceeding from the love of God above all things, would put away 
sins and justify. “For charity covereth the multitude of sins.” 
(1 Pet. iv. 8). 

But when he saw many , &c. As early as the time of Jonathan, the 
brother of Judas Maccabaeus, there were three sects among the 
Jews, the Pharisees, the Essenes, and the Sadducees. Josephus 
(Ant. lib. 13, c. 9) thus writes concerning them : “In the time of 
Jonathan there were three sects, who disagreed among themselves 
about human affairs. They were the Pharisees, the Sadducees, 
and the Essenes. Of these the Pharisees attributed some things, 
but not all, to fate ; and some things they say are in our own 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



/ 


108 JEWISH SECTS. 

power, so as to be or not to be. The E^sencs affirm that all 
things are in the power of fate; and that nothing can happen to 
man except by the decree of fate. But the Sadducees altogether 
deny fate in human affairs. They say that nothing happens 
because it is fated to happen, and that everything is in our own 
power ; and that we ourselves are the authors of our own happi- 
ness or misfortune, according as we follow good or evil counsel." 
He treats more fully of these sects, De Bell. Jud . lib. 2, c. 7, where 
he says that the Pharisees professed a more accurate knowledge 
of the rites of the law: the Sadducees denied Providence, and 
rewards and punishment for the soul after death, which is the 
only bridle which will restrain from sin ; and when it is withdrawn, 
men rush, like unbridled horses, into all manner of voluptuous- 
ness. Whence S. Luke says (Acts xxv. 8), “ The Sadducees say 
that there is no resurrection, neither angel, nor spirit, but the Pha- 
risees confess both." For the Sadducees followed the fables of 
the Greek Sophists and Atheists, and laughed at the Elysian 
Fields of the Blessed, at Orcus, and Cerberus, and Hell. The 
Pharisees opposed the Sadducees, following the faith and hope of 
the ancient Fathers, Abraham, Moses, and the Prophets; and the 
people were on their side. But on the side of the Sadducees were 
the nobles, and it would appear, Herod, who lived like an atheist, 
in all licentiousness and cruelty. When Christ came, both Pha- 
risees and Sadducees conspired against Him, as the common 
enemy of the Jews. Against the Sadducees the Book of Wisdom 
was written, and the Second Book of the Maccabees, as I have 
shown. The Sadducees were so called as though they were just, 
because they arrogated to themselves the name of justice, from 
sadoc, "justice; " or rather from Sadoc, the name of their founder. 
The Pharisees were so called as expounders and explainers of 
the Law, or separated (for the root cno parash signifies to sepa- 
rate, and also to expound) frem the common people by their 
learning and sanctity. Their masters and chiefs were R. Hillel, 
and Shammai, who S. Jerome says, on the eighth chapter of Isaiah, 
lived a little before Christ. They were, however, always opposed 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


THE ESSENES. 


109 

to virtue and the truth: whence they are here most severely re- 
buked by S. John, because they were proud, and puffed up with 
a vain opinion of their wisdom and sanctity, as well as because 
they were hypocritical, and, as though ambitious of a feigned 
holiness, they sought for baptism with the rest, that they might be 
accounted holy by the people. Thus Origen (tom. 6 in Joan .). 
It may be added that they wished by this means to bind John to 
themselves, and stop his mouth from speaking of their faults. 
This is what politicians do at the present day. The Essenes alone, 
on account of the goodness of their faith and morals, favoured 
Christ and Christians. Indeed, being made Christians, they 
became the first monks under S. Mark, as I have shown, on 
Acts v. 2. 

O generation of vipers . This is a Hebraism, meaning, Ye are 
vipers sprung from vipers, the very evil children of very evil 
parents, noxious, crafty, and poisonous, who propagate your per- 
nicious morals and errors which you have derived and inherited 
from your wicked ancestors, in your disciples, as your children, 
whose souls you kill and destroy. So SS. Jerome and Gregory. 
For the bite of the viper is so noxious and destructive that it causes 
death in seven hours, or, at furthest, on the third day. Christ ex- 
plains John's words, saying (Matt, xxiii. 31), “Ye bear witness 
against yourselves that ye are the children of them that killed 
the prophets. Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers. 
Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the dam- 
nation of hell ? " 

S. Ambrose, on Luke iii. 7, thinks that the prudence of the 
Pharisees is here alluded to, according to the words, “ Be ye wise 
as serpents;" for the serpent, by prudence, provides for the future; 
yet does not its venom leave it. So likewise was it with them : 
by a certain provident devotion, they took care of the future, and 
desired the baptism of John ; and yet they forsook not their bad- 
ness and their sins. 

Who hath warned you to flee, &c. To flee , that is, to escape . For 
warned, the Greek has vttcSc&v, signifying— (l), suggested , advised; 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


iio 


HOW TO ESCAPE 


(2), showi, demonstrated — i.e., by reasoning and example. Hence 
frro8a£ts means, a demonstration . 

The wrath to come does not mean the destruction of Jerusalem by 
Titus, so much as the wrath ot Christ the Judge, which He will 
manifest to the wicked who are condemned in the Day ot Judg- 
ment. It means the vengeance and sentence of condemnation 
which He shall then pronounce upon them, as Christ Himself ex- 
plains. (Matt, xxiii. 33.) It means the wrath and angry coun- 
tenance of Christ, which shall then so terrify the wicked, that 
“ they shall say to the mountains, Fall upon us, and hide us from 
the face of him that sitteth upon the throne, and from the wrath 
of the Lamb : for the great day of their wrath is come, and who 
shall be able to stand? ” (Apoc. vi. 16.) S. John the Baptist .was 
a true preacher of the kingdom of heaven, promising it to those 
who repent, but a preacher likewise of the wrath of God and ot 
hell, with these threatening the impenitent, such as were the 
Pharisees and Sadducees. Let the true preacher do the same, as 
Isaiah did (ii. 19), and Hosea (x. 8), and Christ Himself (Luke 
xxiii. 30). 

The meaning of the whole is clear and plain. Who hath 
shown, or pointed out ( demonsiravit ', Vulg.) that ye shall escape 
the coming wrath? That is, the judgment of an angry Christ, 
and everlasting damnation. For so Christ Himself explains 
John, when He threatens the same Scribes and Pharisees with 
Gehenna, saying, “Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how shall 
ye escape the damnation of hell ? ” That is to say, “ By no means 
shall ye be able to escape that condemnation; but of a very 
surety ye shall fall into it, because ye are a generation of vipers ; 
i>., ye have your malignity and hypocrisy so long a time in you, 
and so confirmed by practice, that ye cannot be torn away from 
them, because ye do not wish to be. As dissemblers do ye draw 
nigh to me, as though ye repented, when either ye do not believe 
in God’s providence, wrath, and vengeance, like the Sadducees ; 
or, if ye do believe in them, ye believe as the Pharisees do ; ye 
fear them not, but proudly think that ye are righteous.” So John 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



THE WRATH TO COMB. 


HI 


gravely rebukes them. “ Who hath promised you that ye shall 
escape hell ? False is your persuasion, O ye Sadducees! There 
is a hell. Most vain, likewise, is your presumption and security, 
O ye Pharisees ! in that ye are not afraid of hell, because ye 
proudly esteem yourselves righteous." The emphasis is on the 
word vir&ct£cy. “ Ye live securely, and are asleep in your lusts, 
just as if there were no vengeance of God, and punishment of 
wickedness after this life, or at least as if they need not be appre- 
hended by you. Whence is that security of yours, whence that 
viro$o£is, that demonstration, that proof, that suggestion? It 
comes from no sure and evident reason. It comes only from your 
own pride and foolish persuasion.” Jansen and Franc. Lucas 
give another turn to the words. They think they are the expres- 
sion of John’s rebuke of the hypocrisy of the Pharisees and 
Sadducees, as though he said, “I do not believe that ye are 
approaching my baptism in sincerity : for who could have pointed 
out to you that by my baptism of repentance, the coming wrath of 
God might be escaped, when either, like the Sadducees, ye do not 
believe in that wrath, or else do not fear it, like the Pharisees ? 
For to the unbelieving and the arrogant, nothing can be demon- 
strated or persuaded which goes contrary to their own opinion or 
their pride. Wherefore ye do not repent ex ammo , but ye pretend 
that ye are fleeing from the anger of God.” 

Maldonatus has another opinion. He thinks that these are the 
words of John admiring so great and so sudden conversion of 
the Sadducees and Pharisees. “ Who hath demonstrated to you 
that ye should fear the judgment of God and hell fire, which afore- 
time ye either did not believe, or else did not fear? Whence 
comes so great a change in you ? ” “ Not surely from yourselves, 

but from the mighty grace and operation of God,” says S. 
Chrysostom, “ and from your evil conscience, which accuses you of 
your guilt, and compels you to fear the judgment of God.” 

Tropologically , S. Bernard teaches that coming (Gr. fitXkawrrp) 
wrath must be escaped by present wrath, t.e. } by penance, which 
a man imposes upon himself, or accepts when imposed upon him 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



112 


THE FRUITS OF PENANCE. 


by God. “ What, O miserable ones ! hath pointed out to you to 
flee from the coming wrath ? Why do ye so greatly flee from the 
present wrath, when by it ye may escape that which is to come ? 
Why do ye fear the scourge ? Why decline the rod ? These are 
the things which in this your day belong unto your peace, if ye 
would but know it. You only change, you do not escape penance. 
For it cannot be that the wicked shall go unpunished. He who is 
not punished here of his own will, shall be punished elsewhere 
without end. A wretched exchange indeed, and a token of the 
extreme of madness, is that exchange by which ye would decline 
temporal affliction, and choose the eternal anguish prepared for 
the devil. The sinner who would avoid the rod of the correcting 
Father, will fall into the everlasting punishment of God the 
Judge.” 

Bring forth therefore , &c. Gr. Kapirov a£iov, worthy fruit , in the sin- 
gular. Worthy fruit of penance. Observe that the genitive of 
penance is governed by the word fruit , as well as by the word 
worthy . The Baptist teaches the way and the means of escaping 
the wrath to come, that it is present repentance, but it must be 
worthy penance, that is to say, true, serious, and condign or suitable. 
“ Because ye, O Sadducees, do not believe the providence of God, 
and the anger which shall overtake the wicked in hell ; and because 
ye, O ye Pharisees, do not fear that anger because ye trust in your 
own works that ye are righteous, therefore shall ye both fall into 
that hell. And therefore, that ye may both escape it, do penance, 
and change your lives. Do ye, O ye Sadducees, exchange your 
faithless atheism for belief in Divine Providence : do ye, O ye 
Pharisees, exchange your pride for humility, your gluttony for 
abstinence, your lust for chastity, your covetousness for almsdeeds, 
your outward Pharisaic righteousness and the boast of it for Chris- 
tian and inward holiness. Bring forth such fruits as truly become 
penance, as indicate serious repentance, such as proceed from the 
heart of a true penitent. They are tears, detestation and punish- 
ment of sin : they are the conversion of life and conduct.” (See S. 
Gregory, Horn. 20 in Evang.) 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


THK GUILT OF MORTAL SIN. 


113 

Let me add that worthy penance is that in which the measure of 
grief and pain corresponds to the measure of the pleasure and the 
sin, that according to the enormity of the sin should be the increase 
of punishment. A far heavier penance should be that of the adul- 
terer than of the thief, of the parricide than of the manslayer. 
Whence, in the Penitential Canons, penances are justly decreed 
and measured out to every kind of sin. Justly, I say, having 
regard to the crimes and to man, not with respect to God. 
For one single mortal sin, inasmuch as it is an offence against 
God, and because thereby the sinner implicitly places his chief 
good and end in the creature, which he loves so as to prefer it to 
God, and so takes away from the honour of the Deity, such sin is 
therefore as it were Deicide and Christicide, and so contains 
within it an infinity of wickedness. For it is an offence and an 
injury against God, who is immense and infinite. Wherefore by 
no punishment or penance of any creature whatsoever can just 
and adequate satisfaction be made to God. Yea, even if all men 
and all angels were, of their own accord, to endure all the tor- 
ments of hell for all eternity, they could never offer worthy penance 
and satisfaction to God for a single mortal sin. Christ alone can 
do this, inasmuch as He is the Son of God, and very God. His 
penance, therefore, and satisfaction, as regards His Person, which 
is of infinite dignity, are likewise of infinite value, and are equal and 
adequate to the infinite offence committed against an infinite God. 
Such is the sinfulness of sin, which if men thoroughly perceived, 
surely they would sin no more. 

Lastly, he brings forth worthy fruits of repentance, who, when 
he is converted, serves the truth with as much zeal as before he 
served the devil and vanity; and loves God as fervently as before 
he loved the world and the flesh. Hear Climacus, how he gives 
an exact description of penitence : “ Penitence is an ever-abiding 
abandonment of fleshly consolation. Penitence is a willing en- 
durance of all afflictive dispensations. Penitence is the continual 
framer of scourges tor itself. Penitence is the strong source of 
tribulation for the belly, and the stern rebuker of the sinful soul." 

1 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



1 14 


HOW GOD RAISES UP 


And think not to say, &c. As it were, boast not to say among 
yourselves, to think, and flatter yourselves as relying on the 
thought, that ye have Abraham for your father. For the Jews 
were accustomed to confide and boast in this, that they were sons 
of Abraham. This was their reply to Christ, “ We be Abraham’s 
seed." It was this vain-glorious boast of theirs which S. John 
here denounced. And the sense is this: “Abraham was a most 
holy patriarch and a friend of God, to whom God promised bless- 
ing and salvation, which was to be handed down to his children. 
Now we are sons of Abraham, and therefore heirs of these 
promises. Let us live therefore as we please, and refuse all 
worthy penance, yet shall we be saved by this, that we are the 
children of Abraham. God is faithful to His promises, that what 
He hath promised He will surely perform. Were it not so, Abra- 
ham would be defrauded of his sons, and of their salvation 
promised by God ; and the race of Abraham would come to an 
end." John answers as S. Paul does (Rom. ix.), that the sons of 
Abraham, the heirs of the blessing and salvation promised to him, 
are not reckoned by carnal generation, but by faith and virtue, 
which are spiritual things. Insomuch that not those are counted 
sons of Abraham who are born of Abraham, but those who imitate 
the faith and holiness of Abraham. Wherefore even if the 
Sadducees and Pharisees, and the rest of the Jews, were to fall 
from righteousness and salvation, God would bring others in their 
place, and give them to be as it were children unto Abraham and 
successors to his blessings. “So that, although ye should perish, O 
ye Jews, the blessings promised to the seed of Abraham will not 
perish, but will be transferred from you, who are unworthy, to 
those who are worthy, viz., the Gentiles." 

God is able, &c. John was preaching and baptizing in Bethabara, 
i.e., the house of the passage, where the children of Israel, under 
Joshua, passed over Jordan dryshod. Wherefore in memory ot 
this great miracle Joshua set up in this place twelve stones, taken 
from the bed of Jordan. Remigius and S. Anselm think that S. 
John here spoke of and pointed out those very stones. So also 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


CHILDREN TO ABRAHAM. 


"5 

does Pineda. These stones were types and figures of the Gentiles, 
buried beneath the waves ot error and ignorance, but at length 
raised up by Christ and His Apostles from the lowest pit ot 
idolatry into the Church by baptism, to the glory of being sons of 
God, 

You will ask, how can this be true? For how can sons of 
stones become sons of Abraham now dead ? And even if stones 
were raised up and endowed with life, how could they be born of 
Abraham ? Many here betake themselves to allegory, but I say 
that the words are true in their plain meaning as they stand. I. 
Because God is able of stones to form men, whom He, by His will 
and intention, could reckon to Abraham for sons, or whom 
Abraham might adopt, just as God was able to form Adam out of 
the ground, and from barren Sara to produce Isaac unto Abraham. 
S. John seems to allude to Isaiah li. : “ Look unto the rock whence 
ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit whence ye are digged,” i.e., 
as he goes on to explain, “ Look unto Abraham your father, and 
unto Sara that bare you.” 2. Physically and precisely. As 
God turned Lot's wife into a pillar of salt, so is He able to turn 
stones into men, and children bom of Abraham. Yea, God, by 
His infinite power, is able wholly to transmute any created 
substance whatsoever into any other substance, and that either 
as regards matter or as regards form. For it suffices for a real 
transformation that the accidents only should remain the same, 
as is the case in transubstantiation, where the whole substance of 
the Bread of the Eucharist is converted into the Body of Christ. 

S. John compares the Sadducees and Pharisees to stones, both 
that he might signify their hardness and obstinacy in evil, as well 
as humble their pride. As though he said, “O ye swelling 
Pharisees, of yourselves ye are no better than stones; and that 
wherein ye are more excellent than stones ye have from God. It 
was God who made you children of Abraham, and if ye be proud 
He will blot you out from the family of Abraham, and will raise 
up others in your place, and those even of stones if it so please 
Him. 

I 3 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



WHAT IS MEANT 


I 16 

Lastly, God is able to turn any stones whatsoever into men, 
and endow them with the faith and piety of Abraham, and so 
make them spiritual children of Abraham. For, as the Apostle 
says (Rom. ix. 7), “Not they who are sons of the flesh are sons 
of God, but they who are sons of the promise are counted for 
the seed" — t\e., are reckoned as the seed and sons of Abraham. 
Whence, mystically, God raised up out of stones children unto 
Abraham, when he made Gentiles — who were rough and un- 
polished, and who worshipped stocks and stones, and were on 
that account likened unto stones by David (Ps. cxv. 8) — to become 
sons of Abraham by imitation of his faith, piety, and obedience. 
For he is the father of believers and of the just. So SS. Jerome, 
Hilary, Ambrose, Augustine, Gregory (Horn. 10), and all the 
ancient Fathers. Euthymius adds that there was a fulfilment at 
Christ’s Passion, when many who were hard of heart, seeing the 
rocks rent and other miracles, repented and believed in Christ. 

For new is the ax, &c. Here is another stimulus wherewith 
John pricks the Pharisees to do penance, and that speedily, 
threatening them, indeed, with the peril of being cut down, and 
burnt up in hell. So S. Chrysostom, Euthymius, and others. Of 
these Euthymius says, “ The axe is compared to death, the tree to 
man." That is why the Greek is iKKomerai , is cut down, and 
BdWerai , is cast into the fire — meaning it is upon the very point 
and verge of being cut down. “Your fate, therefore, O ye 
Pharisees, hangs as it were upon a razor’s edge. The extreme 
of peril hangs over you ; destruction, death, and hell are gaping 
for you. Therefore bring forth worthy fruits of penance, that ye 
may escape those things." The meaning is, the axe — that is, the 
vengeance and judgment of God — is laid to the roots of the trees — 
that is, to the life of each individual — that if they be unfruitful, as 
up to this present time is your case, O ye Sadducees and Phari- 
sees, it may speedily cut them down by death, and cast them into 
the eternal fire. But it, on the other hand, they be fruitful, and 
produce repentance and good w'orks, it shall in a little while, not 
so much cut them down as transfer and transplant them to the 


Digitized by CjOOQle 



BY THK AXS OF GOD. 1 1 J 

celestial paradise, where they shall produce the perennial fruits 
of eternal felicity, glory and praise. 

You may say, Surely this was true before the coming ot Christ 
Why, then, saith John, after His coming, “Now is the axe laid,” 
&c. ? I answer, because all this is more clear and sure since the 
coming of Christ. For Christ for this very purpose came into the 
world, that as the Judge, King, and Lord of all men, He might 
translate those who believe in and obey Him to heaven, and 
punish the unbelieving and disobedient with present and eternal 
death. Therefore Christ, by Himself, by His Apostles, and by 
John, clearly preached and promised to the pious the kingdom of 
heaven, and threatened the wicked with hell, that they might 
know that in His hand is their salvation and their damnation, and 
that by turning to Him they might escape hell, and be put into 
the way for heaven ; and that He was able immediately to do 
all this, and that He would shortly do it, since there was no longer 
any excuse of ignorance or infirmity for men, as there was to the 
uninstructed Jews before Christ, to whom present and temporal 
rewards and punishments, not future and eternal, were promised 
and threatened by Moses and the prophets. 

Secondly, and more aptly, the axe is the judgment and ven- 
geance of Christ, the King and the Judge, wherewith He will cut 
off not only noxious, but unfruitful trees — that is, the Jews — from 
the garden of the Church, and from the salvation and the blessing 
promised to Abraham and his children, and cast them into the 
eternal fire; and shall, in their stead, plant the Gentiles who 
believe in Him in the paradise of His Church, which is, as it were, 
the estate and heritage of Abraham, who is the father of all them 
that believe. John therefore threatens the Pharisees with the 
reprobation of the Jews, and intimates the calling of the Gentiles 
into their place, which was shortly afterwards accomplished by 
Christ; for He rejected the Pharisees and the Jews from the 
family of Abraham — that is, from the Church of the faithful, and 
consequently from the kingdom of God. 

I indeed baptize you , &c. These words must not be connected 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



fl8 DIFFERENCE BETWEEN JOHN’S BAPTISM 

with what precedes, nor were they spoken immediately after- 
wards by John. But they were spoken as suitable to an occasion 
of which S. Luke gives an account and explanation (iii. 16) : 
“ While all the people were in expectation, and were musing in 
their hearts of John, whether he were the Christ or not, John 
answered them all and said, I indeed baptize you with water, but he 
that is mightier than I cometh after me, the latchet of whose 
shoes I am not worthy to unloose. He shall baptize you with the 
Holy Ghost and with fire.” From the sanctity of his life and the 
fervour of his preaching, and from his baptizing, the people 
suspected that John was the Messiah, or the Christ. For none of 
the other prophets, except John and Ezekiel, had made use ot 
baptism. (See Ezek. xxxvi., where he foretold that baptism would 
be a sign of Christ : “ I will pour clean water upon you, and ye 
shall be cleansed from all your filthiness.”) John therefore puts 
an end to this suspicion, and declares that he is not the Christ, but 
the forerunner and indicator of Christ, and that his baptism was 
a prelude to the baptism of Christ, and a preparation for it. 

So he says, “ I indeed baptize you in,” or “ with water,” that is, 
withwater only. This is a Hebraism, for the Hebrews denote the 
instrument by the preposition or letter 3, or in, which is under- 
stood in Latin. So the Hebrew said bammayim “in,” or “with 
water, unto repentance,” that I may stir you up to repentance, and 
that I may prepare you by corporeal ablutions for the washing of 
the soul to be received in the baptism of Christ. The baptism of 
John therefore was a profession of penance. Whence those who 
were about to be baptized by him confessed their sins, not that 
there was thereby a condonation of their faults; for this they 
were to wait for from Christ, by means of His baptism and true 
contrition. 

He that cometh after me. Gr. 6 ipxofuyo*, i.e., the coming One, He 
whose advent is at hand, who is nigh us, even at our doors. 

Mightier than /. Gr. urxvportpos, i.e., stronger, more powerful, more 
excellent, and who in gifts far excels me. For He is mighty by 
His own divine and heavenly strength, wherewith He influences 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



AMD THAT 07 CHRIST. 


1 19 

not only the body, as I do, but the soul by the Spirit of His grace, 
and purifies it from every spot of sin. Whence Isaiah (chap, ix.) 
among other titles of Christ gives him that of strong . “ He shall 
be called Wonderful, Counsellor, the Strong God.” (Vulg.) “And 
verily was He Strong, who, by the wonderful power of His 
Divinity, overcame the devil, and took his prey out of his hand, 
and overthrew his kingdom and transferred it to Himself; 
who opened the doors of heaven, and swallowed up death in 
victory; who abolished sin, and brought in grace and glory.” 
(Toletus.) 

Again, Christ was mightier than John in miracles, because by 
a single word He raised the dead, drove out demons, healed the 
sick, changed the elements, whilst John by penance tamed the ' 
flesh that he might subdue it under the Spirit. Thus was the 
strength of Christ the weakness of John. 

Whose shots , &c. Mark adds (i. 7) “falling down.” S. Luke 
has “Whose shoes* latchet I am not worthy to unloose.*' Each 
is true, each denotes the menial office of servants, who kneel 
down, and put on or take off their master's shoes, and carry his 
shoes, when he puts on his slippers. John therefore here con- 
fesses that he is the servant and slave of Christ, that Christ is his 
Lord, yea his God. 

Mystically, shoe denotes Christ's Humanity, which to serve, by 
carrying it on his shoulders, or bearing it in his hand, he acknow- 
ledges himself unworthy. For this humanity, by union with the 
Word, was of boundless dignity and majesty. Whence S. 
Bernard : “ The majesty of the Word was shod with the shoe of 
our humanity.” For since shoes are worn upon the extremities of 
the body, and are made of dead animals, according to S. Gregory 
and S. Jerome they rightly signify the Incarnation of Christ. By 
shoes Theoplylact understands Christ’s coming down to the earth, 
and descent after death into the Limbus Patrum . 

He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost . Christ shall pour forth 
the Holy Spirit, with all His gifts, in such abundance upon you, 
that He shall wash you from all your sins, and fill you, and. as it 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



120 


BAPTISM BY FIRE. 


were, overwhelm you with grace and charity, and Ilis other 
charismata . Christ did this visibly at Pentecost. When He was 
about to ascend into heaven, alluding to these words of John, 
He said to His Apostles, “John indeed baptized with water, but 
ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence." 
(Acts i. 5.) But invisibly He does it in the sacrament of baptism, 
and confirmation, which is, as it were, the perfection and consum- 
mation of baptism. The contrast, therefore, between John and 
Christ is this — John baptized with water only, but Christ with 
water and the Holy Ghost. John washed the body, Christ the soul. 
And as the soul excels the body, so does the baptism of Christ 
excel the baptism of John, which was only rudimentary. So 
the Council of Trent (Sess. 7 Can. 1), and the Fathers generally. 
Hence Doctors speak of a threefold baptism — 1, of the river; 2, 
of breath; 3, of blood. The baptism of the river is when any 
one is baptized with water. Of wind, or spirit (Jlaminis sive spirittis, 
Lat.), when a catechumen in a prison, or a desert, where there is 
no water, is truly contrite for his sins, and wishes for baptism. 
For such a one is justified by contrition, which includes the desire 
of baptism. Of blood, when any one not baptized dies a martyr 
for the faith ; for he is baptized in his own blood, and cleansed 
from all his sins. 

With the Holy Ghost and with fire . So it is in all the Greek, 
Latin, Syriac, Arabic, Persian, Egyptian, and Ethiopic versions. 
It is as though the Baptist said, “My baptism is by water, Christ's 
by fire ; and as fire is more powerful than water, so is His baptism 
more efficacious than mine." Certain heretics, called Hermiani 
and Seleuciani, were wont, for this reason, to baptize their con- 
verts with fire, as S. Augustine testifies (Hares. 59). 

You ask, what is this fire? I. Origen (Horn. 24 in Luc.) under- 
stands it of a purgatorial fire, that Christ will cleanse His faithful, 
dying in venial sins, in the fire of purgatory, according to the 
words, “ The fire shall try every one's work ; " and, “ He shall 
be saved, yet so as by fire." (1 Cor. iii.) So also Suarez out of 
SS. Jerome and Bede. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



MEANING OF FAN. 


121 


2. S. Hilary by fire here understands the judgment ot Christ, 
that it will be sharp, clear, and dreadful, like fire. 

3. S. Basil (on Isaiah, chap, iv.), Damascene (lib. 4 de Fide, c. 10), 
and Toletus, understand the fire of hell, by which Christ punishes 
the reprobate ; whence the Baptist says, “ He shall burn up the 
chaff with unquenchable fire.” 

4. Some by fire understand tribulations , by which, as by fire, 
Christ washes His faithful people from their sins. 

5. And, correctly, by the Holy Ghost and fire is meant the 
Holy, Fiery, and Inflaming Spirit, who is fire — that is, like fire — 
and, as fire, burns, and kindles. It is a hendiadys. The Holy 
Ghost, as it were fire, purges the faithful from their sins, kindles 
and illuminates them, raises them towards heaven and strengthens 
them, unites them closely to Himself, and, like fire, transforms 
them into Himself. Hence, at Pentecost, the Holy Ghost glided 
down upon the Apostles in the appearance of tongues of fire. 
Hence S. Chrysostom : “ By adding the mention of fire, he signi- 
fied the efficacy of the Holy Ghost, the vehement and unconquer- 
able strength of His grace.” Hence, in the primitive Church, the 
Holy Spirit was often wont to descend in the visible appearance 
of fire upon those who were baptized and confirmed, to denote 
the complete purgation of their sins, and the fiery love and 
the words of fire with which the Holy Ghost inflamed them. Ac- 
cording to that in Deut. iv. 24, “God is a consuming fire;” 
and, in Jer. xxiii. 29, “ Are not my words as fire ? saith the 
Lord.” 

Whose fan, &c. The fan is that with which farmers winnow the 
corn which has been thrashed, in order that the w ind may carry 
away the chaff, and leave only the good corn behind. Fan, in 
Greek, irrvov, that which, as it were, spits forth the chaff. It is 
derived from irrvu, to spit out . The fan denotes the judgment of 
Christ, by which, as the faq separates the w'heat from the chaff, 
He separates the good from the bad. The floor here does not 
signify the place, but rather the corn collected in the floor, which 
is cleansed by the separation of the chaff. By metonymy, that 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


122 


HOW CHRIST WILL FAN 


which contains is put for the contents. The floor , then, denotes 
the Church, or the company of the faithful. 

The Fanner is Christ the Judge ; the fan is His judgment, by 
which he fans and examines the thoughts, words, and deeds 
of every one. The chaff are the wicked. The wheat are the just 
and the saints, whom He will gather into His barn, the kingdom of 
heaven, where with them, as with wheat, He will feed and delight 
the Holy Trinity, the Angels, and all the Church triumphant 

John rises from Christs first advent of grace to His second 
advent of judgment And he signifies that this judgment is 
pressing on, and is nigh at hand, by saying, “ His fan is in His 
hand/' So S. Ambrose on Luke iii. 14. For although many 
hundred years may yet elapse before the judgment day, yet all 
those years, if compared with eternity, are but as a very little 
while, or as nothing. Moreover Christ, the Lord and Judge, holds 
in His hand the spirit, soul, and life of all men, to take them away 
if He will, to judge, bless, or condemn them. 

He will bum up , &c. And if the chaff, how much more the tares ? 
The wicked are here called chaff, because, like chaff, they are 
very light, worthless and useless, and good for nothing save for 
fuel of Gehenna. For unquenchable, the Greek has aerf} 
unextinguished \ eternal . Hence a stone which always bums is called 
asbestus . The figure of speech here used is miosis, for little is 
said, much is meant. The fire of hell is ar/taros inextinguishable, 
not only because it cannot be quenched, but because it does not 
consume the wicked whom it burns; nay, it excruciates them living 
and feeling with endless torments. The error of Origen is here 
condemned, who thought that the pains of hell would not be 
eternal, but after the completion of the great cycle of Plato would 
come to an end. 

There is an allusion to Isaiah lxvi. 24, “Their worm shall not 
die, and their fire shall not be quenched;'' and xxxiii. 14, “Who 
among us can dwell with the devouring fire ? Who shall dwell 
in everlasting burnings ?" Where see what I have said. S. 
Chrysostom gives examples, “Do you not discern that sun which 


Digitized by C^ooQle 



THE CORN OF HIS FLCOR. 


123 


ever burns and is never extinguished ? Have you not read of the 
inanimate bush, which was burnt with fire, and not consumed V 9 
And S. Austin ( contra Donaiist . lib. post Collat. c. 9) says, “Now I 
have proved sufficiently, that there are animals, which are called 
PirausfcB because they can live in the fire, and be burnt without being 
consumed, in pain without death, by the marvellous power of the 
Creator. And if any deny that this is possible, they are ignorant 
of Him by whom whatsoever is wonderful in all nature is 
effected. ,, 

Think of, then, and dread this fire of hell, which no water, no 
tears can extinguish : yea, though all rivers, all abysses, all seas, 
were collected together, they could not quench it : which all 
demons, all creatures, with all their powers, could not even 
diminish in the very least degree, “ because the breath of the 
Loro as a stream of brimstone doth kindle it.” 

Then comeih Jesus , Ac. Then, when the Baptist was stirring up 
all to repentance, and baptizing as a preparation for receiving the 
grace of Christ, then, I say, Christ came, that Him whom he had 
commended when absent, he might point out being present, even 
as the day-star goes before and indicates the rising of the sun. 

From Galilee , or as S. Mark says from Nazareth, where he had 
lived with His mother in a private station until He was thirty years 
of age. Then He came to John, that He might be by him 
declared to be the Messiah, that is, the Teacher and Redeemer of 
the world : and that He might, upon John's testimony, inaugurate 
His public office of teaching, and bringing in the Evangelical Law, 
for which He had been sent by the Father. 

To he baptized . You will ask, what were the causes of John's 
preaching and baptism, and why did Christ wish to be baptized 
by him? There was a threefold reason, says S. Jerome. 1. 
That because He was born a man, he might fulfil all the righteous- 
ness and humility of the law. 2. That He might give a sanction 
to John’s baptism. 3. That sanctifying the waters of Jordan by 
the descent of the Dove, He might show the coming of the Holy 
Ghost to the laver of the faithful. 


Digiti; ’ / ^ooQle 



124 


WHY CHRIST WISHED 


4. A fourth reason was that by the Holy Spirit's coming down 
upon Christ in the form of a dove, and by the Father thundering 
from heaven, He might afford Himself an irrefragable testimony. 
So S. Jerome. 

5. Christ, by receiving baptism from John, would allure all men 
to His own Baptism, and would show them its benefit, viz. the 
coming and gift of the Holy Ghost. 

6. Christ took our sins upon Him. Therefore as guilty and a 
penitent He stood before John, that He might wash away and 
cleanse our sins in Himself. Whence Nazianzen says (Ora/, in 
sane/ a laminaria), “John baptizes, and Jesus comes to him, sancti- 
fying even him who baptizes, that especially He may bury the old 
Adam in the waters.” And again, “Jesus ascended up out of the 
water, drawing and lifting up with Himself a drowned world.” 

7. That Christ, who had determined to found the new common- 
wealth of Christians, in which none should be admitted except by 
baptism, should Himself, their Chief, be baptized, that He might 
in all things except sin, be made like unto His brethren. That is 
a famous saying of Cato, “ Submit to the law, which thou thyself 
hast enacted.” 

8. As Abraham formerly, by God's command, instituted the 
sign of circumcision, so Christ would give a new pledge to His 
Church by sanctioning baptism. Thus S. Thomas thinks (3 p ., q . 
66, art. 2) that when Christ was baptized, He instituted the Sacra- 
ment of Baptism, not in words, but in deed. For then there 
appeared all the three Persons of the Blessed Trinity, in whose 
name we are baptized. The Father was manifested by His 
Voice, the Son appeared in Jordan, the Holy Ghost was seen in 
the form of a Dove. 

But it is more correct to say that Christ when He was baptized 
only directed attention to His own Sacrament, and its matter, 
water; but that He instituted it shortly afterwards, when He began 
to preach publicly. For He does not seem to have instituted 
Baptism publicly at the time He said to Nicodemus coming to 
Him privately and by night, “Except any one be born of water 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



TO BE BAPTIZED BY JOHN. 


125 

and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.” 
And this is the opinion of S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine ( Serm . 36 
& 37, de Tempore), S. Gregory Nazianzen ( Ora t. in S Nativity , and 
others, who at the same time assert that Christ by His Baptism 
sanctified all water, and by His corporeal contact with it endued 
it with regenerating power, not as though He infused into water 
any physical, but only a moral quality, because water was then, 
ipso facto , by the intention of Christ, designed for the sanctification 
of men by washing them in the Sacrament of Baptism. 

Tropologically , Christ by His Baptism at this time wished to 
teach us that a holy and perfect life must begin with baptism, and 
that this should be the great object of all who teach others, such as 
doctors and preachers. 

But John forbad him . John recognized Christ by a secret instinct 
and revelation of God, by which he knew Him as to his face, which 
he had seen and known thirty years before, when he leapt in his 
mother's womb for joy. You may ask, “ Why then was there a 
sign given to the Baptist (John i. 33) by which he was to recognize 
Christ, viz., the descending and abiding of the Holy Ghost 
upon Him ? " I reply, This sign was given to the Baptist, not 
that he should for the first time know Christ, but that it should 
more fully confirm him in that faith and knowledge, and that by 
the same, as by a sure testimony of God, he should point out and 
commend Christ to the people. 

I have need to be baptized \ &c. That is, to be spiritually washed 
from my sins, and perfected by the Spirit of Thy grace. Have 
need here does not signify an obligation of precept, as though 
the Baptist was obliged to receive the baptism of Christ. For 
this precept of baptism was given and promulged by S. Peter on 
the Day of Pentecost, and therefore after John's death. Some 
gather from this place that John was soon afterwards baptized by 
Christ Himself, as were also the Blessed Virgin Mary, SS. Peter, 
James, and John, and the rest of the Apostles. This is stated by 
S. Evodius, who succeeded S. Peter in the Chair of Antioch, in an 
Epistle of his. entitled to 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


120 


WAS JOHN BAPTIZED 


In favour of this idea are also Nazian. (Ora/. 39 towards the end); 
“ Christ knew,” he says, “that He would Himself shortly after- 
wards baptize the Baptist; also S. Chrysostom, who says, “John 
baptized Christ with water, but Christ baptized John with the 
Spirit.” Whence the author of the Imperfect Comment, says, “ It is 
plainly written in apocryphal writings, that John baptized Christ 
with water, but He baptized John with the Spirit.” 

Abulensis thinks, on the other hand, that John was not baptized 
by Christ. And he proves it by the marvelling of John's disciples, 
who soon afterwards told John that Christ, whom he had baptized, 
was Himself baptizing, and that all men were coming unto Him. 
For this would have been needlessly told to John if he had been 
baptized by Christ, and he would have given this reply to his 
disciples. So that it is a doubtful point whether John was bap- 
tized by Christ or not. 

And Jesus answering said \ &c. It becometh us, i.e., Me to receive, 
thee to confer, baptism. Others understand us in this way : “ It 
behoves us who are teachers to set an example in ourselves. 
Nothing, however apparently unimportant, must be omitted. 1 
shall institute baptism. It is the part of him who commands, to 
do before others what he commands.” Whence S. Luke says of 
Christ (Acts i. 1), “Jesus began both to do and to teach.” “ This 
is righteousness,” saith S. Ambrose, “ that what you wish another 
to do, you should yourself first begin, and encourage others by 
your own example.” Whence S. Gregory, “ Of true humility is 
ever sprung secure authority. 

Moreover, not only Christ receiving, but John conferring baptism 
fulfilled all righteousness, because, contending in humility with 
Christ, he suffered himself to be vanquished, by being as it were 
put upon an equality with Christ. And so he, as it were, being 
vanquished by Christ in humility, vanquished Christ by yielding 
to Him and obeying Him. As S. Dominic, wishing to give his 
right hand to S. Francis, whilst Francis opposed it and strove to 
take his left, said at length, “You overcome me in humility; I 
conquer you by obedience.” 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



BY CHRIST, OR NOT l 


127 


It is very probable that in the act of baptism John pointed out 
Christ to the people, since the form of John's baptism would be 
something of this kind: “I baptize thee in the Name of Him 
who is to come; ” or, 11 Believe in Messiah who is about to come.” 
This is inferred from chap. xix. 4. Thus it would seem that when 
Christ came, and was being baptized, John would say, “ This is 
Messias of whom I said that He was about to come.” 

S. Jerome observes — “ Beautifully is it said, * Suffer it now/ 
that it might be shown that Christ was baptized with water, and 
that John was about to be baptized by Christ with the Spirit. 
And by-and-by Christ might say, 4 Thou baptizest Me in water, 
that I may baptize thee in thine own blood shed for Me.' ” 

For so it behoveth us to fulfil (Arabic, to perfect) all righteousness . 
Instead of righteousness the Syriac has all rectitude , i>., whatever is 
just, right, holy, and pleasing unto God. And it is not right to 
decline or depart from such things, even though they seem lowly 
and abject ; and even though they be not provided for by any 
precept, but are matters of counsel only. But again, all righteous- 
ness is whatsoever God the Father hath commanded. So Vatabl. 
For that is righteous which God sanctions and commands. And 
it would seem that as God the Father commanded Christ to die, 
so also He gave Him a precept to submit to John's baptism. 

Hence, secondly, the Gloss says, humility is all righteousness — 
humility which subjects itself to all — superiors, equals, and infe- 
riors. On the contrary, pride, by which a man prefers himself 
to all, not only inferiors and equals, but superiors, is all unrigh- 
teousness. For it takes away their just rights, and deprives them 
of the subjection which is their due. For as in every act of righ- 
teousness, />., of virtue, humility comes in, in that a man submits 
himself to reason and virtue, so pride mixes itself up with every 
act of sin, in that a man prefers himself, and his own will and 
desire, to the law and will of God. Humility therefore fulfils all 
righteousness, because it is the head of all right and justice which 
a man owes to God, his neighbour, and himself. He submits 
himself to God by religion, to his neighbour by charity. He 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


128 


HUMILITY IS ALL RIGHTEOUSNESS. 


subjects the body to the soul, the soul to the law of God. Where- 
fore the humble hath peace with all ; the proud with all hath strife 
and war. At this present day how many lawsuits and contentions 
are there between clergy and prelates for places, titles, prece- 
dence ! How both sides pertinaciously contend for what is due to 
each, to the great scandal of the laity, and with little gain of 
victory to either side. For what dost thou gain if thou over- 
comest in the lawsuit, save some small worthless point of honour, 
and in the meanwhile makest a far greater loss of reputation, 
peace, and conscience? Learn from Christ, O Christian, to 
believe in, yea, even to be ambitious of the lowest place, so shalt 
thou be exalted with Christ and deserve the highest. For Christ, 
subjecting Himself to John, was declared by John, yea, by all the 
Holy Trinity, to be greater than John, to be the Son of God. Say, 
therefore, with Christ, “Thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteous- 
ness.” S. Ignatius, the founder of our Society, was a follower of 
Christ when he gave this golden axiom : 

“ With e’en the least, let no true Christian fight. 

But still to yield be e’er his chief delight" 

For the grace, honour, and glory ot a Christian is humility, that 
is to say, to yield, to suffer himself to be vanquished, to yield the 
place of honour to another. Wherefore the greater is he who 
is the humbler. For, as S. Gregory says, “ Pride is the place of the 
wicked, humility the place of the good.” Christ here teaches us 
to follow an ordinary life, not to seek exemption from the common 
law and lot, and to be accounted as one of the common people, 
according to the words in Ecclus. iii. 20, “If thou wouldst be 
famous, be as one of the flock yea, descend to the lowest place, 
and prefer all men to thyself. 

3. All righteousness , i.e. the highest justice. Thus God says to 
Moses (Exod. xxxiii. 10), “ I will shew thee all,” the highest 
“ good” (Vulg.) namely, Myself. For the lowest degree of 
righteousness is to submit oneself to a superior, the middle degree 
to submit to an equal, the highest to an inferior, even as Christ 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


BEAUTY OP HUMILITY. 


129 


submitted Himself to John. Christ, I say, who is the Holy of 
Holies, bowed His head to John tor baptism, as though seeking 
from him sanctification and purification, like the rest, who were 
sinners, who came to his baptism. 

Excellently says S. Gregory (3 p. Pastor . Admomt. 18), “Let the 
humble hear that the Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, 
but to minister; let those who are lifted up hear that pride is the 
beginning of all sin. Let the humble hear that our Redeemer 
humbled Himself, being made obedient even unto death ; let the 
proud hear what is written of their head, * He is a king over all 
the children of pride.* The pride of the devil was made the occa- 
sion of our ruin, the humility of God was found to be the assurance 
of our redemption. Let the humble therefore be told that when 
they abase themselves they rise to the likeness of God ; but let it 
be said to the proud that when they lift up themselves they sink 
down to the likeness of the apostate angel. What then is more 
base than to be haughty ? And what is more exalted than humi- 
lity; which, while it puts itself in the lowest place, is united to its 
Maker in the very highest ? '* 

S. Gregory says elsewhere : “ This is the highest righteousness 
and sanctity, when we are in respect of our virtue the loftiest, in 
respect of our humility the lowliest/* S. Thomas Aquinas, being 
asked by what mark a really holy and perfect person might be 
known, answered, “By humility , by contempt of himself, con- 
tempt of honour and praise, by bearing ignominy and reproach.*' 
“ For if,** he said, “ you see any one, when he is neglected and 
despised, and has others preferred before him, show a sense of 
pain or indignation, to be of a downcast countenance, to turn up 
his nose, wrinkle his forehead, you may be very sure he is not a 
saint, even though he should work miracles. For when he is 
neglected he shows his pride, anger, impatience, and so makes 
himself vile and contemptible.** 

4. All righteousness , i>., every increase of righteousness, that is 
to say, of virtue and sanctity. Christ indeed could not increase in 
interior grace, for with th^t He was always perfectly filled from 

it 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



130 


ALL RIGHTEOUSNESS. 


the first moment of 1 1 is Conception and union with the Word; 
but He showed daily ever greater and greater signs of virtue, and 
ever more and more humbled Himself. For Christ came down 
from heaven into the Virgin’s womb, from the womb to the 
manger, from the manger to Jordan, from Jordan to the Cross, as 
He would teach us in Ps. lxxxiv. 8 : “ They shall go from strength 
to strength : the God of gods shall be seen in Sion.” (Vulg.) So 
S. Augustine ( Epist . 50, ad Dioscorum ), “I would, my Dioscorus, 
that thou shouldst in all piety subject thyself to Christ and the 
Christian discipline, nor fortify for thyself any other way ^f reach- 
ing and obtaining the truth than that which has been fortified for 
us by Him who knoweth the infirmity of our footsteps, forasmuch 
as He is God. And so it is said of that most famous orator 
Demosthenes, that when he was asked what was the first rule to 
be observed in oratory, he replied, Pronunciation ; and when he 
was asked what was the second, replied. Pronunciation ; and being 
asked what was the third, still answered, Pronunciation. So if 
thou shouldst ask and ask again concerning the precepts of the 
Christian religion, I should answer that nothing else but humility 
would make you perfectly fulfil their obligations, although, per- 
chance, I might be obliged to speak of other duties. To this most 
salutary humility, which, that our Lord Jesus Christ might teach 
us, He humbled Himself, to this, the greatest adversary is, if I 
may so say, a most uninstructed science." 

Lastly, he fulfils all righteousness who endures the unpleasant 
ways and manners and tempers of others, according to those 
words of St. Paul, u Bear ye one another's burdens, and so fulfil 
the law of Christ." He who loves those who hate him, blesses 
those who curse him, does good to those who injure him, honours 
those who despise him, vanquishes his enemies by the warmth of 
his love, who with Paul desires to be anathema for his enemies, 
and to be all things to all men that he may gain all for Christ, 
he is truly humble and is like Christ. 

Then he suffered Mm. That is, when he heard this, John yielded 
and baptized Christ. “If God received baptism from man, no 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


CHRIST BAPTIZED ON JANUARY 6tH. 13 I 

one need disdain to receive it from his fel low-servant,” says S. 
Jerome. And S. Ambrose says, " Let no one refuse the laver 
of grace, when Christ refused not the laver of penance." Beau- 
tifully, too, says S. Bernard, "John acquiesced and obeyed; he 
baptized the Lamb of God, and washed Him in the waters ; but 
we, not He, were washed, because, for washing us, the waters are 
known to be of cleansing power." 

S. Augustine (Serm. 154 de Temp!) says that the day on which 
Christ was baptized was a Sunday, though John Lucidus (lib. 7, 
c. 2) was of opinion that the day was Friday. What is certain 
from tradition is, that Christ was baptized on the 6th day of 
January, the same day of the month on which he had been adored 
by the Magi thirty years before. Whence the Church comme- 
morates the event on that day. The Ethiopians on the 6th of 
January, in memory of Christ's Baptism, not only sprinkle them- 
selves with water, but immerse themselves in it. The faithful in 
Greece also were accustomed, about midnight before the 6th of 
January, to draw water from the nearest river or fountain, which, 
by the gift of God, remained sweet for many years, as S. Chry- 
sostom expressly testifies ( Horn . de Baptism . Christiano , tom. 5, 
Opp. Grac!). S. Epiphanius (Hares. 51) adds, that on that day 
the Nile was turned into wine. "About the nth day of the 
month Tybus (our 6tl of January) Christ's first miracle was 
wrought in Cana of Gaiilee, when water was made wine. Where- 
fore in various places, until this very time, the same thing takes 
place as a divine sign for a testimony to unbelievers. Various 
rivers and fountains which are turned into wine are the proof of 
this. Cibyris, a fount of a city of Caria, becomes wine at the very 
hour in which Christ said ‘Draw out now, and bear to the 
governor of die feast.' Gerasa in Arabia is another example. 

I myself have drunk of the fountain of Cibyris, and our brethren 
of the fount of Gerasa, which is in a temple of the Martyrs. Many 
testify the same concerning the Nile." 

Moreover, that the water of Jordan received by reason of 
Christ's Baptism in it the gift of incorruption, Gretser testifies. 

E 2 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



132 


WATER OF JORDAN 


“Let us add this,” he says, “that the waters of Jordan, after 
Christ had consecrated them by His Baptism in them, have been 
endowed with the gift of incorruption. That illustrious prince, 
Nicolas Christopher Radzivil, in his Hodaporicum Hierosolymit ., says, 
“ The water of the Jordan is extremely turbid, but very whole- 
some, and when kept in vessels does not become putrid. This I 
have found to be the case with some which I have brought with me.” 

Christ appears to have been baptized and washed by John, not 
only as to His head, but with respect to the rest of His body. I 
think so, because such was the manner of the Jews, who were 
accustomed to denude themselves of their clothes, and undergo 
their ceremonial baptisms and lustrations naked. Jesus therefore 
condescended to appear naked before John, and he underwent this 
indignity for our sakes, that Adam’s and our nakedness and 
shame, induced by sin, He might clothe and cover by His grace. 
Whence also, as Bede testifies, a church was erected by the 
faithful on the spot where the clothes of Christ were deposited 
when He was baptized. Bede adds, that the same place was 
adorned with a noble monastery and church which was dedicated 
in honour of John the Baptist. 

Gregory of Tours (Jib. de Gloria Martyr ., c. 17) writes about the 
same place : “ There is a place by Jordan where the Lord was 
baptized. The water flows into a certain bay, in which, even now, 
lepers are cleansed. When they be come thither, they wash 
frequently until they are cleansed from their infirmity. As long 
as they remain there they are fed at the public expense. When 
they are cleansed they depart to their own homes. This spot is 
five miles from where the Jordan loses itself in the Dead Sea.” 

The place is called in S. John’s Gospel JEnon, near to Salim. It 
was not far from Zarthan and Jericho, where the children of Israel 
under Joshua passed over on dry ground, that it might be signified 
that the same Christ, who once led the Israelites over Jordan into 
the land of promise* will, by baptism, bring His faithful people to 
heaven. “ And as under Joshua the waters were driven back, so 
under Christ, as our baptized Leader, are our sins turned back,” 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



DOSS NOT CORRUPT. 


133 


says S. Augustine. Again, Elias divided the waters of Jordan 
when he was about to be taken up into heaven in a chariot of 
fire, that it might be signified that those who pass through the 
waters of Christ's baptism shall have an entrance into heaven 
opened to them by the fire of the Holy Ghost Thus S. Thomas. 

And Jesus , when he was baptized \ &c. Luke adds, Jesus being 
baptized and praying . Whence it is plain that not by virtue of 

John's baptism, but by the merit of Christ's humility and prayer, 
the heaven was opened and the Holy Spirit descended upon Him. 

Straightway . This word is best referred, not to the words 
coming up out of the water, but to the heavens were opened . 

Lo / the heavens were opened . Mark has, He saw the heavens opened . 
He — that is, Jesus— John too, and others who were present, 
doubtless saw them, since it was for their sakes this was done. 
Whence Matthew says, They were opened \ t\e., unto him or for him. 
This is, they were seen to be opened in His honour, that God 
might make manifest that heaven is open unto all through Christ, 
says S. Chrysostom. 

Also that the heavenly power of baptism might be pointed out, 
because by it carnal men become heavenly and spiritual, and 
by it are called and, as it were, taken by the hand to heaven. So 
S. Thomas. 

You will inquire, in what way were the heavens opened unto 
Christ ? It is replied, it was not the actual substance ( soliditatem , 
Lat.) of the sky which was opened and rent in twain, for this 
is naturally impossible and supernaturally unneeded. Neither 
were the heavens opened by a merely imaginary vision, as they 
were opened to Ezekiel (i. 1) ; but there was in the upper 
region of the air a hiatus visible to the senses, from which visible 
aperture both the Dove and the Voice of the Father appeared to 
come down upon Christ Such hiatuses appear not unfrequently 
in the atmosphere, concerning which see Aristotle on meteors. 

Hieron. Prado, the Jesuit, on the words the heavens were opened, 
says, “ There was an appearance as though the sky were opened 
and divided by thunders and lightnings, and from the opening the 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



*34 


WHAT THE NATURE OF THE DOVE. 


Father’s voice burst forth as thunder. For thunder is always 
accompanied by lightning ; indeed, lightning is the cause of 
thunder, although the thunder is always heard after the lightning, 
because sound travels more slowly than light.” 

And saw (Syriac, looked up at) the Spirit of God descending like a 
dove (Egyptian, in the form of a dove). .You will ask first, was this 
a true and real dove, or was it only the appearance and likeness 
of a dove ? SS. Jerome, Anselm, and Thomas, Sdlmeron, and 
others, think that it was a real dove; and this is probable. It 
is, however, equally, or rather, more probable that it was not a 
real dove, but only the shape of a dove, formed by an angel, 
agitated and moved so that it should descend upon Christ. The 
reason is that all the Evangelists seem to indicate this. S. Matthew 
says, as if a dove ; Mark, as it were a dove; John, like a dove; Luke, 
in a bodily shape like a dove . There was therefore the appearance and 
similitude only, not the reality of a dove. Nor was there any 
need of a real dove, but of its likeness for a symbolical signifi- 
cation, that by such a symbol those gifts of Christ of which I 
shall speak presently might be designated. In such wise were 
the heavens opened, not in reality, but in appearance, as I have 
already said. This was the opinion of S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, 
S. Chrysostom, Theophylact, Lyra, &c. 

You will urge, Was it then a phantasm, a merely fancied dove ? 
I reply, By no means. It was a real, solid body, having the form 
of a dove, as S. Augustine teaches, de Doctr . Christian . c. 22 ; not 
indeed assumed, hy postatically, by the Holy Spirit, as the Humanity 
of Christ was assumed by the Word, as Tertullian appears to have 
thought, lib. de Came Christi ., c. 3. But it was only an index and 
a symbol of the Holy Ghost It was thus taken because the dove 
is a most meek, simple, innocent, fruitful bird, very amiable, but 
very jealous. Such in like manner is the Holy Ghost, who 
endowed the soul of Christ at the very moment of His conception 
with these qualities of meekness and the rest. And what was now 
done was, by this sign of the dove, to signify that the Holy Ghost 
had done this, and to declare it to the people publicly. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



SYMBOLISM OF THE DOTE. 


I 3 S 

You will inquire in the next place, why the Holy Ghost 
descended upon Christ in the form of a dove, upon Apostles in the 
shape of tongues of fire? S. Chrysostom answers, i. Because 
Christ came in the flesh, and into the world, meek like a dove, for 
the remission of sins, and for the release of sinners. But in the 
Day of Judgment, He will come as a severe Judge, to punish the 
wicked. 2. And more literally, the Holy Spirit was given to the 
Apostles in the likeness of fire, because He endued them with 
fervour and ardour in preaching. (S. Augustine, Tract . 6 in Joan.) 

Again, the dove represented excellently well the Holy Sevenfold 
Spirit, or His sevenfold gifts which He poured upon Christ asi 
Isaiah predicted (xi. 2), “And the spirit of the Lord shall rest 
upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of 
counsel and strength, the spirit of knowledge and godliness, and 
shall fill him with the spirit of the fear of the Lord.” All these 
gifts are appositely signified by the dove. For as S. Thomas 
expounds (3 p., q. 39, art . 6, ad. 4), the dove tarries by flowing 
streams, and when in the waters she beholds the reflection of a 
hawk she is able to escape it. Here is the gift of wisdom. 
2. The dove selects the best grains of corn, and places them by 
themselves in a heap. Here is the gift of understanding. 3. The 
dove brings up the young of others. Behold the gift of counsel. 
4. The dove does not tear with her beak. Behold the gift of 
knowledge. 5. The dove is without gall and bile. Lol the gift of 
piety or godliness. 6. The dove maketh her nest in the rocks. 
See the gift of true strength. 7. The dove utters a mournful 
plaint instead of a song. Behold the gift of fear, wherewith Christ 
and His saints wail for sins, whether their own, or those of others. 

Again, the dove is the symbol of the reconciliation and renewal 
of the world, which the Holy Spirit has wrought through Christ. 
Hence His symbol was a dove, bearing a green olive-branch to 
Noah, signifying that the Deluge and God’s anger were at an end. 

Lastly, because the dove is an amicable and social bird, it denotes 
the union of the faithful in the Church, which the Holy Spirit 
effects through the baptism of Christ. So S. Thomas. In fine, the 


Digitized by ^00 le 



36 


INSTANCES OF THE APPEARING 


dove is very fair, it delights in sweet odours, and it dearly loves 
its young. So too Christ is most fair, He delights in the odour of 
virtues, and dearly loves His children. 

As the Holy Spirit thus descended upon Christ, so has He often 
descended in the form of a dove upon illustrious Christians, more 
especially upon doctors, bishops, and pontiffs of the Church, and 
thus, as it were, consecrated them. S. Eleucadius, the disciple of 
S. Apollinaris, Apostle of Ravenna, when a dove had flown upon 
his head, was ordained Bishop of Ravenna. After a life illustrious 
for sanctity he migrated to heaven, a.d. i 15. (Philip Ferrar in his 
Catalogue of the Saints of Italy 1 ) 

Thus a dove flew down upon the head of S. Aderitus, in the 
presence of the clergy, and designated him the successor of 
S. Apollinaris, and second Bishop of Ravenna. 

S. Marcellinus in like manner, was designated Bishop of the 
same city, a.d. 230. 

S. Fabian, in consequence of a dove lighting upon his head, was 
elected Bishop of Rome. 

When S. Gregory was writing his works, the Holy Spirit, in 
the likeness of a dove, was seen to instil into his ear what he 
wrote. 

So S. Basil, who wished to be baptized in the same river Jordan 
as Christ was, in celebrating Mass, was surrounded by a celestial 
light, and gave orders for a dove to be made of pure gold, and a 
portion of the consecrated Host to be placed in it, and suspended 
it above the altar. So Amphilochius. He adds that S. Ephrem 
saw the Holy Ghost, in the likeness of a dove of fire, sitting upon 
S. Basil, wherefore he exclaimed, “ Truly is Basil a column of 
fire ; truly the Holy Ghost speaks by his mouth.” 

Flavian the patriarch, by the command of an angel, conse- 
crating S. John Chrysostom to be a priest, beheld a white dove 
fly down upon his head. Leo Augustus relates this in his life of 
S. Chrysostom. (See Baronius, a.d. 456, n. 7.) 

This was the reason why the impostor Mahomet tamed a dove, 
and accustomed it to fly to him, by placing in his ear grains of com. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



OF A DOVE. 


137 


which the dove picked and ate, and by this means he persuaded 
the people that the Holy Spirit was his friend, and dictated the 
Koran to him, and revealed the most secret purposes of God. He 
also caused the dove to bring him a scroll, on which was written 
in letters of gold, “ Whosoever shall tame a bull, let him be king." 
But he had brought up a bull, which of course he easily tamed, 
and was thereupon saluted as king by the foolish people. So the 
authors of the Life of Mahomet. 

And lighting upon him . Piously says S. Bernard (Serm. 1 de 
Epiphan .), “Not unsuitably came a dove, to point out the Son of 
God ; for nothing so well corresponds to a lamb as a dove. As 
the lamb among beasts, so is the dove among birds. There is 
the utmost innocence in each, the utmost gentleness, the utmost 
guilelessness. What is so opposed to all malice as a lamb and 
a dove ? They know not how to injure or do harm." 

And behold a voice , &c. From the opened heaven a dove glided 
down upon the head of Christ, and whilst it sat upon Him, there 
came the voice, “This is my Son." The voice explained the 
symbol of the dove, that it had reference to Christ, and to Him 
alone. This voice, “ in the Person of the Father, was framed by 
the ministry of angels," say Victor Antioch, (m c. I S. Marc.). 
Here was first revealed to the world the mystery of the Holy 
Trinity, which had been darkly indicated to the Jews. The 
Father manifested Himself by a voice, the Son was seen in the 
flesh, the Holy Ghost was visible in the form of a dove, that it 
might be signified that the faith of the Holy Trinity was about to 
be unfolded, and that the baptism of Christ was conferred in 
Their Name. For although all these things — viz., heaven opened, 
the forming of the voice, the descent of the dove — were, as 
regards operations, ad extra, as theologians say, common to the 
whole Trinity, yet each several Person was represented by the 
aforenamed symbols. (See S. Augustine, Serm. 38 de Temp.) 

This is my Son. Greek & vto? — i.e., the Son of God the Father, 
by nature, not by adoption, as the angels and holy men are sons 
of God. Therefore the Son of God is not a creature, but the 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



>33 


FULL MEANING OF 


Creator, consubstantial with God the Father, as was defined by 
the Nicene Council. 

Mark and Luke have, in different words, but with the same 
meaning, “ Thou art my Son." And it is probable that these last 
were the exact words used, not merely because of the consensus of 
two Evangelists, but because, when Jesus was looking up into 
heaven, and praying to the Father, it is probable that the words 
would be immediately and directly addressed to Him. So Jansen,. 
Maldonatus, and others. 

My beloved Son, Gr. 6 ayewnp-os, t,e,, only and chiefly beloved, 
through whom all others are beloved. For no one is beloved by 
God save those whom Christ loves. The Syriac has most beloved. 

In whom I am well pleased. As it were, “Thou only, O Christ, 
art perfectly, in all things, and infinitely pleasing unto Me'; and no 
one is pleasing unto Me save through Thee. For by Thee I am 
well pleased with all the human race, with whom I was offended 
because of Adam’s sin." The Heb. mn signifies both to pleaste 
and to be propitious, or reconciled. 

“ Because Thou art the Brightness of My glory and the express 
Image of My substance (Heb. i. 3.), Thou art immeasurably pleas- 
ing unto Me. In Thee nothing ever displeases, but all things 
please Me. Thou art He in whom I have always delight. And 
for Thy sake all Thy disciples and followers — that is to say, all 
holy Christians— are pleasing unto Me." There is an allusion 
to Noah, who alone of his generation pleased God. (See Gen. 
vi. 9 ; viii. 20.) 

As, therefore, Noah was well-pleasing unto God — especially 
when he offered the sacrifice unto Him, with which He was 
propitiated, and promised that He would no more destroy the 
world by the waters of a flood— so, much more, when Christ 
offered Himself to God as a peculiar and special victim, did He 
cause God to be propitious to the whole human race. “By this 
Voice w r as Christ constituted by God the Father the universal 
Doctor and Legislator of the world." 

The voice added, Hear ye him, “ Hear Christ, believe in Him. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



MY BELOVED SON. 


*39 


obey Him. He hath come forth from My bosom. He will show you 
My mysteries, things kept secret from the foundation of the world. 
He will open to you the way of peace, the way to heaven, the 
way to happiness. He will preach to you the glad tidings of the 
kingdom of heaven, even such divine things as eye hath not seen, 
nor ear heard, neither have they come into the heart of man." 
Hence, when the Magdalen sat at the feet of Jesus, and diligently 
listened to Him, it was said to her, “ Mary hath chosen that good 
part which shall not be taken from her." 

Very. well saith S. Leo (Serm.de Transfigurai.): “This is My 
Son who is from Me, and with Me from everlasting. This is My 
Son, who is not separated from Me in Deity, divided in power, 
severed by eternity. This is My Son, My very own, not created 
of any other substance, but begotten of Myself. This is My Son, 
by whom all things were made. This is My Son, who sought 
not by robbery that equality which He hath with Me. 
attained it by no presumption, but, abiding in the form of My 
glory, and in order that He might fulfil Our common purpose for 
the restoration of the human race, He bowed down the unchange- 
able Godhead, even to the form of a servant. In Him, therefore, 
I am in all things well pleased, and by His preaching I am mani- 
fested, and by His humility I am glorified. Hear ye Him, therefore, 
without delay, for He is the Truth and the Life. He is My 
strength and My wisdom. Hear Him of whom the lips of 
the prophets sung. Hear Him who hath redeemed the world by 
His Blood; who by His Cross hath prepared for you a ladder by 
which ye may ascend up to heaven." 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



CHAPTER IV. 


I Christ fastrth, and is Umpted, 1 1 The angels minister unto him. 13 He dwelieth 

in Capernaum , , 17 beginneth to preachy 18 calletk Peter , and Andrew , 21 

James , and John, 23 and healeth all the diseased. 

r T''HEN was Jesus led up of the spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the 
JL devil. 

2 And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterward an 
hungered. 

3 And when the tempter came to him, he said. If thou be the Son of God, 
command that these stones be made bread. 

4 But he answered and said. It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone, 
but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God. 

5 Then the devil taketh him up into the holy city, and sctteth him on a 
pinnacle of the temple, 

6 And saith unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down : for it is 
written. He shall give his angels charge concerning thee: and in their hands 
they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone. 

7 Jesus said unto him, It is written again, Ihou shalt not tempt the Lord 
thy God. 

8 Again, the devil taketh him up into an exceeding high mountain, and 
sheweth him all the kingdoms of the world, and the gloiy of them ; 

9 And siith unto him. All these things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down 
and worship me. 

10 Then saith Je>us unto him, Get thee hence, Satan: for it is written, Thou 
shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve. 

11 Then the devil leaveth him, and, behold, angels came and ministered unto 
him. 

12 Now when Jesus had heard that John was cast into prison, he departed 
into Galilee ; 

13 And leaving Nazareth, he came and dwelt in Capernaum, which is upon 
the sea ooast, in the borders of Zabulon and Nephthalim : 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



14 That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the proph jt, saying, 

15 The land of Zabulon, and the land of Nephthalim, by the way of the sea, 
beyond Jor an, Galilee of the Gentiles ; 

16 The people which sat in darkness saw great light ; and to them which sat 
in the region and shadow of death light is sprung up. 

17 From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent: for the king- 
dom of heaven is at hand. 

18 And Jesus, walking by the sea of Galilee, saw two brethren, Simon called 
Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea : for they were fishers. 

19 And he saith unto them, Follow me, and I will make yon fishers of men. 

20 And they straightway left their nets, and followed him. 

21 And going on from thence, he saw other two brethren, James the son of 
Zebedee, and John his brother, in a ship with Zebedee their father, mending their 
nets ; and he called them. 

22 And they immediately left the ship and their father, and followed him. 

23 And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, and preach- 
ing the gospel of the kingdom, and healing all manner of sickness and all manner 
of disease among the people. 

24 And his fame went throughout all Syria: and they brought unto him all 
sick people that were taken with divers diseases and torments, and those which 
were possessed with devils, and those which were lunatick, and those that had 
the palsy ; and he healed them. 

25 And there followed him great multitudes of people from Galilee, and 
from Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judaea, and from beyond 
Jordan. 

Of the devil . Syriac, by the accuser, Gr. 8ta^8o\o$, accuser , calumniator. 
For Satan is he who accuses men before God perpetually, that he 
may gain them for himself and Gehenna. 

Then, that is, immediately after His Baptism. Hence S. Mark 
says, " Straightway the Spirit driveth him into the wilderness.” 
Whence it would appear that Christ on the same 6th day of 
January on which he was baptized was driven by the Spirit into 
the wilderness. And at the close of the same day He commenced 
His forty days' fast, which He would finish on the 15th of 
February. Thus speedy in every good work are both Christ and 
the Holy Spirit. 

Was led, ’ Gr. was withdrawn, and taken away out 

of the midst of the multitude of the people with whom He had 
hitherto dwelt, that He might have time for prayer and fasting. 
Mark has, the Spirit driveth him, where the word drive denotes the 
power, efficacy and alacrity of the Spirit which was in Christ, and 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



142 


DESERT OF QUARANTANA. 


which was to be in the Apostles and all other Christians, and 
which was to drive or impel them to heroic acts of virtue, accord- 
ing to the words (Rom. viii. 14) “As many as are driven by the 
Spirit of God, they are the sons of God.” (Vulg.) Christ then 
was led by the Spirit, not rapt through the air, but through the 
impulse of the Spirit, going with the utmost alacrity upon His 
feet, to the scene of His contest with the devil. 

The desert was Christ’s wrestling ground of prayer and fasting 
and an angelic life, where He entered upon His duel with Lucifer 
and vanquished him. 

The wilderness. This desert is called Quarantana. Adrichomius, 
in his description of the Holy Land, gives the following account of 
it out of Brochardus and others : — 

“The desert of Quarantana, between Jerusalem and Jericho, 
begins near Anathoth, and extends above Gilgal as far as the 
desert of Tekoa and Engaddi, by the Dead Sea. Here dwelt 
John the Baptist. In the same wilderness is a mountain called 
also Quarantana. It is near the Jordan, lofty and difficult of 
access. Here the Lord was first tempted of Satan. There is upon 
the top a ruined chapel, held in veneration on aocount of Christ’s 
fast and prayer.” 

Tropologically , listen to S. Ambrose, lib. 3 de Virgin . : “ Let us, too, 
follow Christ, far from luxury, far from lasciviousness, living as it 
were in the arid soil of His life of fasting. Not in the market- 
place, not in the broad streets is Christ found. So let us not seek 
for Christ where He cannot be found. Christ is not in the courts 
of law, for Christ is peace ; in the courts are lawsuits, Christ is 
justice ; in the forum is iniquity, Christ is charity ; in the forum 
is detraction, Christ is fidelity; in the forum is fraud and 
perfidy,” &c. 

Of the Spirit. Not the devil, but the Holy Ghost. This is clear 
from the sixteenth verse of the third chapter. This Spirit of God, 
therefore, was the possessor and charioteer of Christ, driving Him 
into the desert. Whence the Syriac has, of the Spirit of holiness , 
*>., the Holy Ghost, the fountain of all holiness. This is clear, 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



WHY CHRIST WAS TEMPTED. 


143 


too, from the presence of the Greek article, rov live v/hxtos. And The 
Spirit is here put in opposition to the devil, who follows as the 
adversary of Christ and the Holy Ghost, that Christ’s Own Spirit 
might lead Him where the evil spirit might find Him to tempt 
Him, says S. Gregory. 

That he might be tempted of the devil . The word that does not 
signify that the Holy Ghost directly intended that the devil’s 
temptation should assail Christ, for that were an evil thing : but 
only that the temptation should be permitted for the sake of 
Christ’s profit and victory, which He surely foresaw, and so 
opposed Christ, as it were an athlete, to the devil. 

■ 1. In the first place, the Holy Spirit intended by this temptation 
to afford to Christians, baptized and converted to God, an ideal of 
religious life, whereby they should know they must fortify them- 
selves against the temptations which are sure to attack them. So 
SS. Chrysostom and Hilary. Whence Tertullian ( de Baptism ., last 
chapter) teaches, that it is here signified, that no one without 
temptation shall attain the Kingdom of God. 

2. The Holy Ghost would show that there is no temptation 
which may not be overcome by grace, by prayer and fasting, by 
repeating the words of -Scripture, the precepts and promises of 
God. 

3. Christ, who was often tempted by Satan, thus showed Him- 
self to be like unto all other men, His brethren, as the Apostle 
teaches, Heb. iv. 15. 

4. That He might show that those who are about to become 
doctors, preachers, prelates, apostles, must needs be first proved 
by temptations, and be strengthened by prayer and meditation in 
solitary retreats, and there drink in a large supply of the Spirit, 
which they may afterwards pour forth upon others. They who be 
wise, first go apart with Christ into the wilderness of prayer and 
meditation. 

5. That challenging Lucifer to battle, He might vanquish him, 
and his whole army of demons with him. This duel between 
Christ and the devil is as when the sun struggles with the sur- 


Digitized by ^ooQle 



144 


USE OF TEMPTATION TO US. 


rounding clouds, with this motto, “ Splendour is from me.” “For 
the sun,” as S. Ambrose says, “is the eye of the world, the 
pleasantness of day, the beauty of the heaven, the measure of 
seasons, the strength and vigour of all the stars. As the sun 
dissipates the clouds, so does Christ all the temptations of the 
devil.” And again, “As the sun makes brilliant the darkest 
clouds, so does Christ, by the splendour of His grace, convert 
desolation into consolation, temptations into victories, war into 
triumph.” 

6. That by His temptation as an example, He might overcome 
our temptations, and might teach us to fight with and overcome 
the same antagonist. For although the faithful, conscious of 
their own infirmity, ought to avoid temptations as far as they can, 
according to the words of Christ, “ Lead us not into temptation,” 
yet when temptations do come, they must, relying upon Christ, 
valiantly resist them, remembering His words; “Be of good 
cheer, I have overcome the world.” Whence S. Augustine on 
Psalm xci. says, “Therefore was Christ tempted, that the Christian 
might not be overcome by the tempter.” For as S. Ambrose 
says, “ When thou art tempted, recognize that a crown is being 
prepared for thee. Take away the contests of the martyrs, you 
take away their crowns. Take away their torments, you take 
away their beatitudes. Is not the temptation of Joseph the cele- 
bration of his virtue ? Is not the wrong of his prison the crown of 
his chastity ?” 

S. Luke (iv. i) says, being tempted of the devil forty days . From 
this some think that besides the three temptations mentioned by 
the Evangelist, Christ suffered many other temptations during 
these forty days. They also think that verse 14 points in the 
same direction, And when he had ended all the temptation. Thus 
Euthymius, Jansen and Cajetan, Origen (Horn. 29 in Luci), Bede (lib. 

I in Marc.), Augustine (lib. 2 de Concern. Evang. c. 4). 

S. Luke, by using the present participle ir<cpa£o/Acvo9, which the 
Vulgate renders by the imperfect, was being tempted , seems to refer 
principally to the three celebrated temptations of Christ as the 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


WHY SATAN TEMPTED CHRIST. 145 

summing up as it were and the chief of them all. As Suarez 
rightly points out. 

Of the devil, namely Lucifer, the prince of all the demons. And 
it was just that Christ should now contend with him, as He had 
afore contended with him in heaven, when He cast Satan 
ambitiously seeking the hypostatic union, and envious that He was 
about to become man, down to Tartarus, as some suppose. 
Lucifer therefore, at this time, came forth from hell, and taking the 
form of a man — of a holy man, says Carthusianus — tempted Christ, 
(i) that he might make trial whether He were God's own Son 
in very deed, and (2) that he might entice Him to sin. As there- 
fore Lucifer, through Eve, tempted Adam, and overcame him, so 
he tempted Christ, and was overcome by Him. We are here 
taught that when the devil foresees any one will be an illustrious 
doctor of the Church, he is accustomed to assail him with various 
temptations, that he may cast him down, and destroy the harvest 
of souls Which he sees he may reap, that he may choke the fruit in 
the seed, as now he strove to strangle all Christians in Christ their 
Parent. 

And when he had fasted . Christ, after the example of Moses and 
Elias, fasted forty whole days and nights, without taking any 
food or drink whatever. He fasted, not by natural but by super- 
natural strength ; and not by strength received from without, as 
Moses and Elias, but by His own proper and intrinsic, that is to 
say, divine strength, as the Fathers teach, passim . 

You ask for what reasons Christ fasted ? 

I answer, 1. That by prayer and fasting He might prepare 
Himself for His work of preaching, and teach us to do the same. 

2. Objectively, that by the hunger consequent upon His fasting, 
He might afford the devil an opportunity of tempting Him ; and 
by the same fasting might arm Himself, and teach us to arm our- 
selves against temptations. So S. Basil {Horn. 1 on Tempt,). 

3. That by macerating His flesh, He might make satisfaction 
for Adam’s eating the forbidden fruit, and for all the gluttony of 
his posterity. 

L 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



146 


LENT THE TITHE OT THE TEAR. 


4. That He might dispose Himself for holy contemplation, and 
show that fasting is as wings, whereby the soul is carried upward 
to celestial things. (S. Chrysostom, Horn, 1 in Gen.) 

5. That He might teach us to despise corporal for the sake of 
spiritual delights ; and that by the contemplation of divine things, 
and the joy which arises from that contemplation, the longing 
for carnal pleasures is quenched, and the thought of food and 
drink taken away. Whence the Abbot John, as Cassian testifies 
( Collat . 19. 4) was so fed with the pleasures of contemplation, 
that he could not remember whether he had eaten the day before 
or not 

6. And chiefly, that He might inaugurate the Lenten Fast, 

observed by Christians according to Apostolic tradition ; that He 
might sanction, and, as it were, consecrate this fast by His 
example. So S. Ignatius ( Epist . 7), and other Fathers, passim . 
The reason was, first, that we might give a tithe of all the days of 
the year to God. So S. Gregory {Horn. 16. in Evang .) “ From 

this day until the gladness of Easter are six weeks, or forty-two 
days, from which, as six Sundays not to be given to fasting must 
be deducted, there remain only thirty-six days. Thus do we deny 
ourselves for six-and-thirty days, as giving the tenth of the 365 
days of the year to God, that we, who have lived by the gift which 
we have received for ourselves, might, for the sake of our Maker, 
mortify ourselves by fasting fn His own tithe of time. Whence, 
brethren most beloved, as ye are bidden by the law to offer the 
tithe of your substance, so also offer to God the tithe of your 
days.” S. Ambrose gives another reason, that as the Israelites 
passed by forty-two stations through the desert to the Promised 
Land, so we too arrive by forty days of fasting at the longed-for 
feast and joy of Easter. Whence Tertullian, Cyprian, S. Ambrose 
{Epist. 25), and others call a fast a station. See in Peter Bongus 
much more concerning the mysteries contained in the number 
forty. See also S. Jerome {ad Prasid.) on the Paschal Candle. 

We may add that the Lenten Fast is appointed for the spring, 
not only for the sanctity of the soul, but for the sanity of the body, 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


INSTANCES OF FASTINO. 


H7 


as D. Viringas, Professor ot Medicine at Louvain, in his book called 
Fasting, the Physician of the Church , says. In spring the blood breaks 
out in various humours, which produce fevers and various dis- 
orders, unless they are kept under by fasting and fish. 

Mystically , S. Augustine, on Ps. cxi. sub init., teaches us that the 
number forty, in connection with fasting, signifies the whole period 
of this present life, assigned by God to repentance and expiation 
of sins, by which we arrive at the Easter of a joyful resurrection, 
and at Pentecost, or the fiftieth day of eternal reward and glory. 

Moreover, some of the ancient Christians, imitating the example 
of Christ, were very rigid in the observance of this fast, as 
Baronius shows (a.c. 57, c. 153). Whence Lucian (in Philopatro) 
testifies that the early Christians were so accustomed to fasting 
that they would spend ten whole days without food. More fully 
writes S. Gregory Nazianzen (ad Hellen. ), concerning the monks 
who live in the deserts of Pontus, that there were many of them 
who abstained from food twenty whole days, and as many nights, 
imitating Christ in one half of His fast. And S. Augustine writes 
( Epist . 86 ad Casulanurn ), that there were some in his time who 
kept a whole week's fast, and that he himself was acquainted with 
them. He adds, “ It has been solemnly affirmed to us by brethren 
worthy of credit, that one kept a fast of forty whole days.*' 

Afterwards he hungered. The most probable meaning is that 
Christ felt some sensation of hunger during the forty days, though 
not such hunger us He did when they were finished, and which 
incited Him to seek for food. 

With Christ equally as with Moses and Elias, prayer and 
converse with God were the nourishment both of soul and body 
throughout the forty days ; for they who wholly give themselves 
up to those things are so fed with their sweetness that they do not 
experience the pangs of hunger. 

You will ask whether Christ by natural strength could live for 
forty days without food and drink ? 

I reply— 1. Both experience and physicians teach that such a 
thing is impossible to the power of nature. There is the & priori 

L 2 


Digitized by C^ooQle 


1 48 


ENOCH AND ELIAS IN PARADISE. 


reason against it, that when aliment is withdrawn the vital heat 
languishes and dies, as the fire of a lamp is extinguished when 
oil fails. 

You may say that Pliny (lib. 7, c. 2) tells us that the Indians at 
the sources of the Ganges live merely by inhaling the smell of 
fruits and flowers. Rondelivius also (lib. 1 de Piscibus , c. 13) 
relates that a certain person lived for forty years upon air alone. 
Robert Bacon relates that an English girl lived for twenty years 
in a similar manner. Simon Portius also says that a girl of 
Spires, about a.d. 1540, lived four years without food. A French 
priest lived for two years without food at Rome, in the time of 
Nicholas V. As to what Pliny says, it is fabulous. Odour 
refreshes the brain, but does not fill the stomach. The other 
instances were brought about either by divine power or by the 
devil’s art, a wonderful example of which last, B. Prosper 
relates of an Indian girl. The young woman of Spires laboured 
under a disease of slow, viscous, and chilous phlegm, and so was 
kept alive. In a somewhat parallel manner Indians, by chewing 
the herb coca, and Scythians, by the herb kippice, can sustain 
hunger and thirst for twelve days. See Delrio (lib. 2, disquts.Magic . 
quasi. 21) ; and Coimb. (lib. 1 de Generate c. 5, q . 7, art . I & 2). 

2. Vehement and protracted attention of the mind to other 
things, such as mathematical, philosophical, or theological specu- 
lations, is able to keep a man without food for some time, but not 
for forty days. And so, contemplation alone would not have 
enabled Christ to live without food for forty days. 

3. The fasts of Christ, Moses, Elias, Simeon Stylites, and such 
as they fasting for forty days, was supernatural, arising from a 
singular providence of God. God in their case suspended tor 
forty days the action of natural heat, and sustained and nourished 
them internally, so that they lived and flourished during the time, 
just as even at this present time Enoch and Elias are living well 
and strong without food for so many thousands of years in the 
terrestrial Paradise, where they feed only upon the spiritual 
delights of prayer and contemplation. 




Digitized by 


Google 



Christ's temptation external. 


149 


Hungered . God, who had for forty days stayed this hunger by 
His intervention, afterwards withdrew that intervention, and gave 
up the body of Christ to the suffering of hunger — 1. That He 
might declare Christ to be true man. As S. Chrysologus says : 
“To feel and to conquer hunger is a work of human labour, not 
to hunger at all is the result of Divine power." (JSerm. 11.) 
Secondly, as S. Ambrose says, “That the Lord's hunger might 
be a pious fraud upon the devil,” that the devil being allured by 
the appearance of hunger, might tempt Christ as if He were a 
man, knowing not that He was God. In c . 4 S. Luc. : “ The lowly 
God-man hungered, that the lofty Man-God might not be made 
known to the enemy," says a certain holy person. 

And when the terdpter came — came , :\e. y in human form, and with 
an audible voice. For this temptation of Christ, like that of Adam 
and Eve, in their state of innocence, was effected by the external 
suggestion of the voice, not by internal cogitations and movements 
of the fancy, rising up against reason and the Spirit For in Adam, 
and much more in Christ, was original righteousness, which kept 
in subjection to the reason all motions of the soul and imagination, 
so that in Him was no unlawful thought, no motion of concupi- 
scence that could be stirred up by the devil, such as is stirred up 
in us since Adam's sin. For by it we have lost original righteous- 
ness, and are vexed by concupiscence. So Damasc. (lib. 3, de Fide, 
c. 20), and from him theologians, passim . Whence S. Gregory 
(Ham. io): “ By suggestion Christ could be tempted ; but His 
mind the delectation of sin wounded not, and therefore all that 
temptation of the devil was without, not within." 

The tempter. Not because he is the only tempter, but because 
he is the first and chief among tempters. For they mistake who 
say that all temptation comes from Satan. Some temptations 
arise out of our own carnal will and frailness, and some from the 
world, tx., from worldly and carnal men. So S. Chrysostom 
(Ham. 54 in Acta), “ Many sin without the devil. He does not do 
everything: many things even come of our slothfulness alone.” 
The devil, however, often rouses concupiscence in us by repre- 


Digitized by ^ooQle 


BATAN envious because 


ISO 

senting to the imagination things to be lusted after, and thus 
inflaming the sensual appetite. In the same way he stirs up the 
world, i>., worldly and carnal men, to tempt us by persecuting 
us, or by enticing us to their follies. So he is called the tempter, 
Kar i(o)(rjv. Note here the craft of the devil, how he tempts 
every one by that to which he has a propensity, or in which he 
is weak. As fowlers and hunters lay in snares for wild birds and 
beasts various sorts of food such as each prefer, so also the devil 
offers the pleasures of the table to such as are prone to gluttony, 
to those who are full he offers ease and sloth, to the proud he 
offers honours, to the contentious lawsuits and strifes, to the avari- 
cious usury, fraud, iniquitous bargains, and so on. (S. Gregory, 
lib. 14, Moral, c. 7.) 

If Ihou be , &c. The devil had heard the Father’s Voice at the 
Baptism of Christ — Thou art my beloved Son; yet forasmuch as he 
saw Him in some respects like a poor, weak, ordinary mortal, 
and being for that reason in doubt whether He were the very Son 
of God by nature, the Wokd itself of the Father, or only a very 
eminent Son of God by adoption, he tempts Christ* and asks Him 
to turn stones into bread, that by His performance of the miracle, 
or inability to perform it, he might determine what kind of Son 
of God he was. For as by the Word of God all things had been 
created in the beginning, so by the same Word might stones be 
suddenly and instantly converted into bread. If therefore Christ 
had done this, the devil would have believed that He was the 
Word of God. 

Angels indeed are able to turn stones into bread, but not sud- 
denly and directly, but by degrees and indirectly, by applying 
active energies to passive objects, with many previous actions, 
alterations, and conversions ; but if Christ could not have done 
what He was asked, and had said that He could not, and that 
this was a Divine work, and peculiar to God, the devil would have 
urged, “Then thou art not the Word of God, nor His Son by 
nature." It is a probable opinion of many theologians that the 
sin and pride of Lucifer in heaven were, that when God revealed 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



OF THE UNION OF THE WORD WITH MAN. IS * 

to him that the Son of God would assume man’s nature, and bade 
him submit himself to Christ as man, he became envious of Christ, 
that a man forsooth should be preferred to himself, who was the 
most glorious angel, and that a man should be taken up into 
hypostatic union with the Word. Of this honour he was himselt 
ambitious, and so rebelled against Christ and God. When there- 
fore he saw this man called the Son of God by John the Baptist 
and the Father, he wished to find out if He were really God’s 
Son, that he might pour out upon Him his pristine envy, fury, and 
indignation. So Suarez. This was Satan’s cross, gnawing and 
tormenting his proud mind. But he conceals all this, veils it 
beneath the cloak of charity, that he wished to succour Christ in 
His hunger. Wherefore it is probable that the devil did not 
abruptly and without preface say to Christ, If thou he , &c., but 
first saluted Him kindly, and insinuated himself by some such 
bland words as these, “ What, my lord, are you doing here alone ? 
I saw you baptized of late in Jordan : I heard a voice come down 
to you from heaven, This is my Son. I should be glad to know 
whether you are truly the Son of God by nature, or only His 
adopted Son by grace. I observe also that you are utterly spent 
with hunger after your fast of forty days. If then you are the 
Son of God, relieve your hunger, convert these stones into loaves 
of bread. This for you were most easy.” 

Wherefore what S. Chrysostom says in this place is not so 
probable — that the devil endeavoured to tempt Christ to unbelief. 
Somewhat as though he had said thus : — " It is true you heard a 
voice at your baptism, This is my Son , but do not imagine your- 
self to be the Son of God, or, if you are, turn these stones into 
bread.” For it would have been folly to try to persuade Christ 
to believe that He was not the Son of God, if He was indeed His 
Son, and knew that He was. 

The devil wished also, by this temptation, to entice Christ to 
make a vain boast of his power, and to distrust the aid of God 
His Father. “ Your Father has for forty days been unmindful of 
you ; He has not given you food. Now then, take care of yourself.” 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


PARALLEL BETWEEN CHRIST 


152 

There was also a temptation to gluttony. For the temptation 
to gluttony, in this case,-would have been, on account of hunger 
to yield to the devil, to acquiesce in his persuasions, and work a 
miracle. For this were directly contrary to religion, which forbids 
all commerce with Satan. Indirectly, it were contrary to tem- 
perance. Calvin, therefore, is wrong in denying that Christ was 
tempted to gluttony. Hear S. Gregory {Horn. 16 in Evangi), where 
He teaches that Christ was assailed by a threefold temptation — 
viz., gluttony, vain glory, and avarice — because Adam had been 
attacked and vanquished by the same temptations : “ He tempted 
him to gluttony when he showed him the fruit of the forbidden 
tree, and persuaded him to eat. He tempted him to vain glory 
when he said, * Ye shall be as gods.' He tempted him to covetous- 
ness when he added, ‘knowing good and evil/ For avarice is 
not only of money, but also of greatness. For that is rightly 
called avarice where loftiness above measure is ambitiously 
desired. Christ was assailed by the same temptations, but over- 
came them : by gluttony, when the devil said, * Turn these stones 
into bread by vain glory, ‘If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself 
down;' by covetousness of magnificence, when he showed Him all 
the kingdoms of the world.” 

But he answered , &c. The Greek and the Vulgate have, in every 
word . This is by enallage of the preposition, in every, for from 
every, as the Vulgate translates in Deut. viii. 3, the passage which 
Christ here quotes. The Hebrew is, “ upon every thing which 
goeth forth from the mouth of the Lord shall man live ” — that is 
to say, on whatsoever thing the Lord shall command, or order for 
the sustentation of life, man shall live and be nourished, as He 
fed the Jews for forty years without bread, with manna from 
heaven (the discourse in Deut. viii. 3 is upon this manna), and fed 
Moses, Elias, and Christ for forty days by His word, and by His 
power, preserving nature. Thus, too, God nourished the Abbot 
John for three years with the Eucharist alone, which he was 
accustomed to receive every Lord's day, when an angel said to 
him, “Christ is thy true food.” Palladius (in Lausiaca, c. 61) 


Digitized by ^ooQle 



AND ADAM. 


153 


attests this. So, too, God nourished S. Mary o Egypt, for nearly 
forty-seven years, in the desert, without earthly food, feeding her 
with tears and heavenly joys. So He fed the Magdalen with 
nothing save angelic music, seven times a day repeated. 

Of this Petrarch sings — 

“ As pass the weary hoars away, 

Seven times is sung the angels’ lay, 

Seven times in each revolving day.” 

So the great S. Sabas, says the author of his life, kept absti- 
nence through all times of fasting, tasting no food whatever, save 
that on Saturdays and Sundays he received the holy sacrament. 

Mystically , every faithful Christian lives by every word of God : 
— i. By receiving Christ, who is Gods Eternal Word, and who, 
being made man, nourishes us by His doctrine, His grace, and 
His example. And we, by receiving Himself, by receiving His 
Flesh, receive His Godhead in the Eucharist. 2. God gives the 
words of sacred Scripture, which feed by illuminating and 
inflaming the mind. 3. He feeds us by prayers and holy 
inspiration. 

Tropologically , S. Gregory {Horn. 16 in Evang.) here admires the 
meekness of Christ. “Consider how great is the patience of God, 
and how great our impatience. If we be injured, or provoked by 
any wrong, we are moved with wrath, and either revenge our- 
selves as far as we can, or threaten when we are not able. 
Behold, the Lord endured the onset of the devil, and answered 
him nothing save words of meekness. He endures him whom 
He might have punished.” 

Then the devil taketh him up into the holy city , i.e. Jerusalem. The 
word, then , signifies that the devil, having been conquered by 
Christ in the first temptation to gluttony, immediately subjected 
Him to a second, vain glory. You may inquire why S. Luke 
places this temptation third instead of second. The reason is 
that S. Luke in this place, as in many others, disregards the 
chronological order of the temptations, which Matthew accurately 
observes. Whence the latter says in the eighth verse. Again the 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



HOW CHRIST WENT UP 


*54 

devil taketh hm* And this is a natural and congruous sequence 
of temptation, to pass from gluttony to vain glory. So SS. 
Chrysostom, Jerome, Hilary, and others. For when the devil 
sees any one despise the pleasures and allurements of the flesh, 
he raises up against him the spiritual temptation of vanity and 
presumption. 

Taketh him . The first opinion we will here notice is that of S. 
Cyprian ( Sermon on the Fast and Temptation of Christ) . He thinks that 
the devil’s taking Christ up was not real but only imaginary, like 
the visions seen by Ezekiel, and such as are the translations of 
sorcerers, who seem to themselves to be transported by the devil 
to a feast — a grand assembly, when in reality they are not trans- 
ported, but the devil is playing tricks with their imagination, some- 
what like the illusions of dreams. But we cannot suppose that 
the devil thus played false with the imagination of Christ, espe- 
cially since the devil had no power over Christ’s inner man. The 
whole of this temptation was effected by means of an external 
voice, not through interior suggestion, as I have already said from 
S. Gregory. 

2. Euthymius and Maldonatus think that Christ was led by the 
devil upon His feet up to the pinnacle of the Temple ; and that 
Satan did this, lest by carrying Him through the air he should 
betray himself. So likewise Anselm and Origen, Horn . 31 

Luc . But from the desert of Quarantana to Jerusalem is a long 
journey, greater than could well have been accomplished in a day. 

3. And most probably, Christ was taken up — *>., was carried 
through the air to the pinnacle of the Temple. So SS. Jerome, 
Gregory, Author Jmperfecti, the Gloss, S. Thomas. Nor is it 
wonderful, says S. Gregory, that Christ should suffer the devil to 
deal with Him in this manner, since He suffered Himself to be 
crucified by the devil’s members — the wicked Jews. Nor did the 
demon betray himself by this, because he might have transported 
Christ in the guise of an angel of light. Or, indeed, he cared 
little now about betraying who he was, since he already suspected 
and feared that he was thoroughly known. Whence in the third 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



TO THE PINNACLE OF THE TEMPLE. 1 55 

temptation he boldly threw off all disguise of an angel of light, 
and unveiled his Satanic arrogance. 

The Author Imperfecti \ and from him S. Thomas, here observe that 
although the devil thus took up Christ so that Christ might be seen 
of all, and be supposed to have commerce with Satan and be 
thought a magician, Christ so wrought unseen that He should be 
beheld of none, though the devil knew it not. 

So Christ made the devil suffer an illusion, who had intended to 
play falsely with Him. For the demon thought that if Christ 
were the Son of God, He would not allow Himself to be taken up 
and carried through the air, and by this would know whether He 
were the Son of God or not ; but Christ, by suffering this, frus- 
trated the demon's plan, and left him still in doubt. Whence S. 
Chrysostom was of opinion that the devil supposed that he carried 
Christ through the air to the pinnacle of the Temple against His 
will, and because He was not able to resist him. 

Upon the pinnacle . It is probable that this pinnacle was the ridge 
or extreme point of the roof of the porch of that part of the 
Temple which was called the Sanctuary, or the Holy of Holies, 
for this part of the Temple alone had a roof (the Court of Israel 
was open to the sky), and like a tower overtopped the whole 
edifice. It was 120 cubits high. If Christ had fallen down from 
thence, He would have fallen into the court of the priests, between 
the porch just spoken of and the altar of burnt offering. The 
devil therefore suggested to Christ that He should cast Himself 
down from this pinnacle into the court of the priests, using some 
some such arguments as these : “ Cast thyself down, and show 
thyself to the priests and the other worshippers of God, and to all 
the people (for they, from the Court of Israel, were able to behold 
the sacrifices which were offered in the court of the priests), show 
thyself, I say, by miraculously gliding down unhurt, to be the Son 
of the True God, of Him whom in this court all are worshipping, 
and to whom they are offering sacrifices.” For by this temptation 
Satan wished Christ to make a vain show of Himself and His 
glory. So Franc. Lucas, Toletus, and others. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



HOW THE DEVIL 


156 

Jansen and Maldonatus understand the passage in another way. 
They observe that the houses and the Temple of the Jews did not 
have steep roofs, but flat like a table, so that men could walk, dine, 
and even sleep upon them, as is plain from Josh. ii. 6 ; Matt. x. 27, 
&c. They add that this flat roof was surrounded on every side by 
a low wall, or parapet, to prevent persons from falling down, ac- 
cording to the command of God, Deut. xxii. 8. And it is probable 
that in this parapet there were some parts higher than the rest, 
as for instance at the corners, just as we see in quadrilateral 
buildings at the present day. And they think that Satan placed 
Christ upon one of these angular turrets, which are called in 
Gr. irrcpvyia, in Heb. kenaphim, i.e. “wings,” because they 
towered aloft, and were like expanded wings floating in the air. 
So Angelomus, Eucherius, Lyra, &c. 

By a similar temptation, as Cassian relates, Collai . 2, cap. 4, 
the devil overthrew Hero. For when he had lived upon bread 
and water only, he persuaded him that he was so holy, and so dear 
to God and the angels, that they would bear him up, if he were 
cast down from on high. Wherefore he threw himself down head* 
long into a well, and there miserably perished. 

Moral Her. The devil, who fell down from heaven into Tartarus, 
strives to cast or drag others down with him. Wherefore when 
he persuades any one to sin, he causes him to cast himself down. 
As Christ saith to the perverse Jews, “Ye are from beneath, I am 
from above.” (S. John viii.23.) Again, Christ, studiously concealing 
from the devil that He was the Son of God, eluded all his arts and 
devices, and kept him in doubt and suspense, so that he should 
not know in what way he might tempt Him. Wherefore learn 
not to make known to every one the secrets of thy soul, lest thou 
be hindered of the devil. In battles, the crown of victory is his who 
can conceal his own plans, and discover those of the enemy. A 
Christian learns by frequent experience that heroic acts of virtue 
are easily accomplished, if the determination of them be kept 
secret in the mind, and they are suddenly brought out into 
the sphere of action, before the demon has been able to get 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



CAN BE FOILED. 157 

scent of them and oppose them. This is the art of deluding the 
demon. 

For it is written , Ac. A citation of Ps. xci. n. The angels in 
this place mean properly men’s guardian angels, though any other 
messengers whom God sends in various ways to help and save men 
may be understood. Whence SS. Chrysostom, Jerome, Hilary on 
this passage, Origen {Horn. 24 in Luc . ), Nazianzen ( Or at. in S. Bap - 
iisma.), think that the devil here wrongly cites Holy Scripture ; 
that the Psalmist in the passage in question speaks of mere men, 
not of Christ, who was the God-man. For He had not, like 
other men, a guardian angel ; the Divinity Itself was the Guardian 
of His Humanity. 

On the contrary, S. Ambrose (in cap. 4 Luc.), and Remigius (on 
Ps. xci.), think that the devil did not wrest this passage of the 
Psalms, but applied it rightly to Christ ; for although He had not 
any stated guardian angel, He had all the angels at His call, all 
deputed to minister unto Him. The devil did, however, wrest the 
text so far as this, that he used it for an evil purpose, namely, to 
make Christ cast Himself down. For God hath promised this 
guardianship of the angels to the righteous who act prudently and 
piously, not rashly and presumptuously, after the manner of those 
who tempt God. Hear S. Bernard, on Psalm Qui habitat , Ser. 14. 
“ What has he commanded ? Surely what follows in the Psalm, 
‘That they may keep thee in all thy ways.’ Does he say in 
precipices, in such a way as casting thyself headlong from the 
pinnacle of the Temple ? That is not a way but a destruction, a 
downfall. Or if it be a way, it is thine own, not God's/’ 

Moraliter, the same S. Bernard (on Ps. xci. Scrm. 12) : “He has 
.commanded His angels concerning thee. Wonderful condescen- 
sion ! And, indeed, great affection of His love I For to whom, 
concerning whom, and what hath He commanded ?” After some 
other remarks, “ How great reverence ought these words to instil 
into you I What devotion ! What trust ! reverence for their 
presence, devotion for their kindness, confidence for their pro- 
tection. Walk then warily, as one to whom the angels are nigh 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



OUR GUARDIAN ANGEL. 


158 

Whithersoever thou mayest go apart, in every corner have thine 
angel in reverence. Dare not to do in his presence that which 
thou wouldst not dare to do if I saw thee/' “As often as any very 
fierce temptation is seen to oppress thee, or vehement tribulation 
to threaten thee, invoke thy Guardian in those due times of trouble. 
Call upon him and say, * Lord, save us, we perish.' He neither 
slumbereth nor sleepeth." 

In their hands shall they hear thee . So of S. Benedict it was said 
by S. Bernard, that at a certain time, when he appeared to have 
his eyes intently fixed upon a refulgent light, he saw the soul of 
S. Germanus, Bishop of Capua, borne by the angels in a globe of 
fire into heaven. 

Jesus said unto him , It is written again , &c. For he tempts God 
who asks for a miracle without necessity, such as this would have 
been, for Christ might have descended iromthe pinnacle by means 
of the stairs. 

In necessity, however, say for the sake of avoiding a worse 
destruction, it would be lawful to cast oneself from a precipice if 
no other way of escape appeared. Thus many holy virgins, that 
they might escape from the hands of sinners who sought to defile 
them, have cast themselves headlong into rivers, preferring to die 
as martyrs rather than be violated as virgins. For greater is the 
wreck of virginity than of life. For as the honour of the one is 
greater than that of the other, so also is the disgrace. This is 
what S. Pelagia, a virgin of Antioch, fifteen years of age, did, 
together with her mother and sisters. “Who," as S. Ambrose 
says (lib. 2, de Virgin .), “ when the persecutors were following hard, 
and a river torrent shut them off from flight, but shut them up for 
the crown, cried out, ‘What are we afraid of? Behold the water! 
What doth hinder us to be baptized ? Let the water receive us, 
the water which makes virgins, which opens heaven, covers hell, 
hides death, creates martyrs.' When they had repeated these 
words, they join their hands, as though they were leading a dance, 
and advanced into the middle of the stream. You might have 
seen the pious mother twining their hands together. ‘These 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



MOUNT OF TEMPTATION. 1 59 

victims, O Christ,' she said, ‘I immolate to Thee, presidents of 
virginity, leaders of chastity, comrades of Thy Passion.' " 

Moraliier . Learn here that the devil in the same way that he 
tempted Christ to cast Himself headlong, tempts Christians by 
raising the fancy, the blood, black bile, so that they may have sad, 
horrible, sanguinary, despairing, blasphemous thoughts, such as 
had never come into their minds before. Let them comfort them- 
selves by the example of Christ, how God permitted His temptation 
for His greater virtue and merit. The advice which Scipio Nasica 
gave the Romans not to destroy Carthage when it was conquered, 
lest the Roman youth should become enervated by ease, for that 
Carthage, raising war, would be a perpetual spur to their courage, 
you might apply to the struggle which the saints endure through 
frequent temptations. Thus S. Paul, though almost an angel upon 
earth, said, “ Lest the abundance of the revelations should puff me 
up there was given me a thorn in the flesh — the messenger of 
Satan to buffet me." The remedy is constancy of mind, fortitude, 
and firm confidence in God, by which you will manfully overcome 
temptations of every sort, however dreadful and abominable they 
may be. Yea, you will despise them, and proceed with a great 
heart in the course of virtue in which you have entered. 

The devil formerly came to S. Anthony complaining that all 
men spake ill of him. “ And very properly," said the saint, “ for 
it is your own fault, since you vex and distress all men." The 
demon answered, “ I do nothing ; I have no power against him 
who is unwilling. Men vex themselves and one another. It is 
their own consent to my suggestions which makes them the authors 
of evil." He who consents not to the devil when he tempts him, 
but resists him, overcomes him, and triumphs over him. 

Again the devil , &c. In descriptions of the Holy Land, this 
mountain is said to be near the desert of Quarantana. “The 
devil's mountain is distant two miles from Quarantana. It is to the 
south of Bethel and Hai. Up it Christ was led by Satan, when he 
showed Him all the kingdoms of the word." So Adrichomius. 

You will ask, in what way did the devil show to Christ an the 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


l60 HOW GOD SHOWS THINGS TO HIS SAINTS. 

kingdoms of the world and the glory of them, and that “in a 
moment," as S. Luke adds ? Observe, God alone is able to do 
this absolutely ; for, in the first place, God is able so to strengthen 
the power of sight in men that they are able to see any object, 
however remote, and that even through rocks and walls, so that 
they see things as they are in themselves, without visible 
appearance. In this manner He strengthens the mind of the 
blessed with the light of glory, so that it beholds God’s essence 
without any appearance. So S. Anselm saw with his bodily eyes 
things which were done on the other side of a wall, as his “ Life" 
records. In a similar manner God is able to make us here in 
Rome see with our bodily eyes things done in the bedchamber of 
the King of China. 2nd. God is able to multiply visible appear- 
ances in such wise that they are dispersed through places dark 
and dense, and even far distant and remote. 3. He is able, not only 
to draw forth the appearance from an object, but to prolong it to 
any place whatever. Thus, God showed the whole of the 
promised land to Moses from Mount Abarim ; thus, He set the 
whole world before the eyes of S. Benedict in a round globe, as 
S. Gregory relates (lib. 2 Dial., c. 35). The devil can do none of 
these things. 

How, then, did he present all kingdoms before the eyes of 
Christ ? i. Origen understands kingdoms mystically, as the 
reign of the devil, in which he rules in some men by anger, in 
others by pride, in others by gluttony, and so on. Listen to 
Origen : “ The devil showed Him innumerable multitudes of men 
whom he held in his dominion, and said unto Him, * 1 know that 
Thou art come to fight against me, and take my subjects from 
under my sway. I ask You not to contend with me. You need 
not trouble Yourself to fight. One thing only do I ask, that Thou 
shouldst fall down and worship me, and then receive all my 
empire/ " But this is mystical, not literal. 

2. Some think that the devil flew with Christ through all the 
kingdoms of the world, and in this manner showed them to Him ; 
but the language used will not admit of this interpretation. It 


Digitized by C^ooQle 


HOW THE WORLD WAS SHOWN. l6l 

was from their position on the mountain that Satan showed Christ 
the kingdoms. 

3. S. Cyprian ( Tract . de Tent at, Chrisit) is of opinion that they 
were not shown to the senses, but to the imagination. But I have 
already shown (on verse 3) that this whole series of temptations 
was external, not internal, and that the devil had no power over 
the imagination of Christ. 

4. Others suppose that the demon, by means of many mirrors 
reflecting from one to the other, gathered together the appear- 
ances of all the kingdoms of the world, and presented them to the 
eyes of Christ by art similar to that, by which Socrates is said to 
have seen a dragon in a far distant mountain devouring men, 
which no one else was able to see. Similarly we now behold very 
distant objects by means of a nautical telescope. But to have 
done this, the demon must have filled the whole atmosphere with 
mirrors, and even then they would not have sufficed for seeing 
all things. 

5. And with more probability, Euthymius and others, with 
S. Thomas (3 p., q, 41, art . 4) say that the devil took Christ up on a 
lofty mountain, that he might show Him, at least in a confused 
way, the situation of each kingdom, as by saying thus : “ There 
in that direction is Asia ; there is Europe, here is Syria, there is 
Italy” — and all this in a moment, as Luke says, that is, in an 
extremely brief space of time. And because from this mountain 
the devil showed Christ not only all kingdoms, but the glory of 
them, we may add with Theophilus, Jansen, and others, that the 
demon, like a painter, represented in a compendious manner 
pictures of all kingdoms in the air by varied refractions of the 
rays of the sun, as is done in the case of the rainbow, and so, as 
h were, painted them as to cause whatsoever was glorious and 
splendid in all lands to be set before the eyes of Christ Thus did 
the same demon make dense the air and so work upon it, that he 
pictured many spectres of lions, wild beasts, serpents, and monsters, 
and brought them before the eyes of S. Anthony that he might 
terrify him, as S. Athanasius asserts in his Life of S. Anthony, 

M 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



1 63 


THE DEVIL’S ARROGANCE. 


If the demon is able to picture sucn tilings to the fancy, why not 
in the air ? Various colours are depicted in the rainbow. In the 
time of the Maccabees, squadrons of soldiers were seen fighting 
in the air, with other portents. 

And said unto him , &c. You ask, how did the devil dare to 
make such an impious proposal to Christ ? I answer that he is so 
ambitious that even from the beginning he wished to be God, 
and envied Christ, as man, the Divinity which He had by means 
of the Hypostatic Union. Ambition, therefore, and envy blinded 
him so that he treated Christ as his rival. 2. Because when he 
saw Christ once and again declining to work a miracle, he made 
himself more and more certain that He was not the Son of God. 
3. Because from Luke iv. 6 we learn that the devil added, " Fof 
unto me they are delivered, and unto whomsoever I will I give 
them,” from whence it is plain that he pretended to be the Son of 
God and God, and consequently an object of worship, as S. Hilary 
says. The devil then, from Christ’s patiently suffering Himself 
to be transported from the pinnacle of the temple to the mountain, 
and growing bold by Christ’s modest silence, suspected that He 
was not the Son of God, but a mere man ; and so he here demands 
the Divine honours which he had formerly coveted in heaven — 
that they should be rendered to him by Christ as well as by all 
other men. For this ambition of being a god is, as it were, 
innate in him, and blinds him, says the Gloss. And therefore 
he introduced idols, that by them he might be worshipped. 
Satan, moreover, by this solicitation of worship, wished to make 
still further trial whether or not Christ were the Son of God. 

In the two previous temptations he made trial directly whether 
Christ were the Son of God, but in this third temptation his direct 
object was to tempt to avarice, ambition, and idolatry, and indirectly 
to find out if He were the Son of God. 

Observe the arrogance of the devil. He does not care for any 
mere adoration, but such only as is accompanied by falling down 
and prostration. Hear what S. Irenaeus says upon this expression, 
fall down. “The devil himself confesses that to worship him and 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


FALSITY OF SATAN'S PROMISES. 


163 

do his will is to fall from the glory of God." He therefore sells 
us vain honours at the price of our own destruction. Irenaeus 
adds, "Not even these things which he has promised will he 
give to him who has fallen." 

S. Luke adds that the devil gave a reason why he made this 
offer to Christ, but in so doing he told a double falsehood. He 
said "All these things have been delivered unto me," *>.,by God, 
but he withholds mention of the Divine Name, both because it is 
hateful to him and because he himself wished to be accounted and 
worshipped as God. And God has not given into his power the 
kingdoms of the world. "For the earth is the Lord’s and the 
fulness thereof/' Secondly, because it is false that the devil gives 
them to whom he will. He did not intend to give the kingdoms 
of the world to Christ, neither would he have given them, even 
though Christ had worshipped him. The devil therefore here 
betrays himself, as Toletus observes, because this his promise 
was false, arrogant, and deceitful. We have seen why it was 
false. It was deceitful because he exchanges the present for the 
future. " I will give," he says, but he would have the adoration 
now. By a similar fraud the devil endeavours to persuade men to 
give their youth and time present to pleasures and himself, but to 
give the future and old age to repentance and God : though old age 
is uncertain, and ill adapted for penance, as S. Gregory warns us. 

Lastly, observe how Christ, by His examples and answers, 
teaches us that the first temptation of the flesh and hunger is to be 
overcome by hoping in God and His providence ; the second, of 
pride and presumption, is to be vanquished by the fear of God ; 
the third, to avarice and ambition, must be driven away by great- 
ness of soul and contempt of the world. B. Peter Damian 
suggests three efficacious incentives to bring this to pass. "The 
conqueror of the demons is made the companion of angels ; the 
exile of the world is the heir of Paradise ; the denier of himself is 
the follower of Christ." 

Then saith Jesus, Gei thee hence, Satan . The Syriac adds, behind me. 
Jesus spake thus in righteous anger and indignation ; and so the 

M 2 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



1 64 


HOW TO ANSWER SATAN. 


devil, despairing of victory, fled away in confusion. Whence let 
Christians learn bravely to repel the suggestions of the devil and 
to rebuke him, and he will flee from them. 

It is written , &c. For thou shalt worship , the Hebrew has KTO 
lira, “ thou shalt fear." For the Hebrews by the word fear signify 
reverence, adoration, the whole worship of God. As Statius 
says, “Fear first made gods to be in the world." The word 
only is not in the Hebrew, but it is understood in the pronoun Him . 
Thou shalt worship , I say, Him alone, Him, thy Creator . Thou 
shalt serve Him with lairia. For the Greek is Xarpcvow ; since 
latria is rendered to God alone, dulia to the saints, according to 
S. Augustine (de Civ . Dei, lib. 10, c. i), to the Blessed Virgin 
hyperdulia . 

Moraliter . Christ here teaches us the answer we should give to 
the devil when he tempts us to avarice or any other sin. All 
temptation tends to this, that we should prefer the creature to 
the Creator, and make it, as it were, our idol, and worship 
it Thus, the idol which the devil sets before the covetous man is 
Plutus, mammon, riches, kingdoms ; the idol of the proud man is 
honour, ambition ; of the glutton, his belly; of the wanton, Venus. 
With Christ we must answer Satan, “ I worship God, not Plutus 
or Venus." For as S. Cyprian says ( Traci, de Sped.), “ He 
casts himself down from the vantage ground of his nobility who is 
able to admire anything in comparison with God." For what is 
the whole world, what are all its kingdoms — all creatures — com- 
pared with God, but as a point compared with the universe? 
What is all time in respect of eternity, but as a moment ? What 
are all pleasures, honours, riches, compared with the riches and 
honours of eternity, but vanities and shadows, yea, but dust and 
ashes ? Despise them, therefore, for God’s sake, and cleave close 
to Him ; and then, last, overcome all temptation. As the Psalmist 
says, “ It is good for me to hold me fast by God." And again, 
“My soul is firmly stayed upon God." As S. Cyprian (de Oral. 
Domin.) says, “ Since of God are all things, to him who hath God 
nothing will be wanting, if he be not wanting to God." 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHRIST THRICE A VICTOR. 


165 

In like manner, if the devil threaten you with the fear of infamy, 
poverty, disease, death, join thyself to God, worship Him with 
constant hope and prayer. S. Cyprian (in Exhort . Martyr .) shows 
that some fell away from martyrdom because they had respect to 
the fierceness of the torments, not to the strength and help of God, 
and that those stand fast and conquer who turn away their minds 
from the torments and fix them upon God, and say, “ I can do all 
things through Him who strengtheneth me.” God is greater than 
the torments. So S. Agnes, fixing all her hopes and love upon 
Christ, vanquished all the torments of the tyrant. For God hath 
chosen the weak things of the world to confound the strong, and 
He wills to show to the whole world His strength in our weakness. 
For God cannot forsake those who hope in Him, call upon Him, 
and worship Him. 

Wherefore, S. Cyprian (Tract, de Mortal i) says, “Adversity does 
not withdraw us from the power of faith, but confirms us.” Of 
this S. Anthony had experience, who, on the testimony of S. 
Athanasius, was wont to say that “ the best remedy for over- 
coming all the temptations of the devil is spiritual joy and the 
love of Christ, from one sign of whose cross he flies away 
vanquished.” 

Then the devil , &c. Rightly Anon, (in Catend) says, “ The end 
of contests is found when the adversary yields to his victor of his 
own will, or is vanquished by a threefold fall according to the 
rules of pugilism.” For he who has thrice overcome his 
antagonist is plainly his superior. 

Then the angels approached Christ in His human form which 
He had assumed, and congratulated him, and brought Him food, 
and rendered Him other offices of their service, as their Creator 
and their Lord. 

Learn from hence that he who bravely conquers the devil is 
rewarded by the ministry, the strengthening, and the consolation 
of the angels. For the conqueror of Satan becomes, as it were, 
one of the angels. 

Origen (Horn. ?i in Luc.) and Abulensis are of opinion that when 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



i66 


END OF TEMPTATION. 


the devil tempts a person to some particular sin, and has been by 
him thoroughly vanquished, he does not tempt him any more in 
the same way. Salmeron, the Jesuit, thinks the same. But it is 
more probable that the devil having been once thoroughly 
vanquished either by Christ or Christians, only departs from them 
for a season, as S. Luke says, and returns whenever another 
occasion offers to try them by a similar, or even by the same 
temptation. For so S. Anthony was often tempted in the same 
way ; and S. Paul was frequently, and of long continuance, 
tempted by the same thorn in the flesh. 

Let us hear S. Ambrose (lib. 4. in c. 4 Luc., vcr. 13) : “ Rightly 
are these three temptations of Christ shown to be the fountains of 
all sins. Nor would Scripture have said that all the temptation 
was ended, unless there were in these three the material of all 
offences, the seeds of which must be avoided in their origin. The 
end of temptations is the end of desires, because the causes of 
temptations are the causes of desires. The causes of desires are 
the pleasing of the flesh, the show of glory, the greed of 
power." And after a little, “ You see, then, that the devil is not 
persevering in his zeal ; that he is accustomed to yield to true 
courage. And though he does not leave off to envy, he ceases to 
attack, because he has often fled away when triumphed over." 
After much more, S. Ambrose thus concludes : “ Therefore, He 
who wishes to give a crown suggests temptations. Whenever 
thou art tempted, know that a crown is being prepared." 

Ver. 12. — When Jesus had heard \ &c. Matthew, Mark, and 
Luke all omit the embassy of the Jews to John the Baptist, asking 
him if he were the Messiah. To this first year of Christ's 
ministry pertain also the turning water into wine, the driving the 
buyers and sellers out of the temple, and the discourse with 
Nicodemus. These all took place before the imprisonment of the 
Baptist, and are related only by S. John. For before his im- 
prisonment Christ had committed to John the work of preaching, 
but now He took that office upon Himself. Moreover, when 
Christ heard of John's imprisonment, He departed out of Judaea 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



HEROD ANTIPAS. 


167 


into Galilee, because He fled from Herod, that he might not 
imprison Him as he had done John. In Galilee, therefore, he began 
solemnly to preach, that He might fulfil Isaiah’s prophecy, of 
which more presently. 

You may say — Herod reigned in Galilee, not in Judaea. Why 
then did Christ, to avoid Herod, flee into Galilee? I reply, 
because John, preaching in Judaea, near Jericho, and gathering 
together the multitudes, was accused to Herod, probably by the 
Scribes and Pharisees. For they had been sharply rebuked by 
John, and called “ a generation of vipers.” In their anger they 
suggested to Herod, who they knew was hostile to John, that he 
should apprehend him, lest he should make a tumult, and incite 
the people to rebellion. Josephus (An/., lib. 18, c. 7), says that 
Herod slew John through fear of a rising of the people who 
flocked to John. The same Scribes and Pharisees were, it is pro- 
bable, hostile to Christ, who had been pointed out by John, and 
who was wont, equally with John, freely and publicly to rebuke 
their vices. And although John had baptized in Judaea, he had 
perhaps passed into the neighbouring Peraea, which was subject 
to Herod. When Christ therefore heard of John’s apprehension. 
He fled from Judaea into Galilee, lest He should be delivered by 
the same Scribes and Pharisees, with the connivance of the 
Roman governor, to Herod. But Jesus was not afraid of Herod 
himself, because He had not offended him personally, as John had, 
by reproving his adultery. This Herod Antipas was the son ot 
Herod of Ascalon, the murderer of the innocents. 

This was the second departure of Christ from Judaea into Galilee. 
The first is related in John i. 43, and is the same which is referred 
to by S. Mark (i. 14), S. Luke (iv. 14), and S. John (iv. 3, 43.) 

Ver. 1 3 . — And leaving his awn city , &c. Leaving i.e., passing it by. 
Jesus did not wish to enter Nazareth, although it was His own 
city, to begin His preaching there. S. John gives the reason 
(i v. 44), “ Because a prophet hath no honour in his own country.” 
Therefore He went to Capernaum, and set up there His Chair of 
preaching. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



1 68 


CAPERNAUM. 


Observe, there were two Galilees, one, Lower Galilee in the 
tribes of Issachar and Zabulon, in which was Nazareth: and 
Upper Galilee in the tribes of Aser and Nephtali, in which was 
Capernaum, and which was called Galilee of the Gentiles , because 
it bordered upon Phoenicia, and was largely peopled by Gentiles. 
A considerable portion of it was given by Solomon to Hiram, 
king of Tyre. (See I Kings ix.il.) 

Capernaum , which is hv the sea. Because it was near the Jordan, 
where it flows into the Sea of Galilee. From its situation it 
became a most celebrated emporium for merchandise, and the 
metropolis of Galilee. In wealth, luxury, and beauty it far sur- 
passed all the other cities of Galilee, and thence derived its name. 
For Capernaum is as though caphar naim , “ the field 

of pleasantness or delight/ 1 as S. Jerome says on Hebrew names. 

In this city then, Christ began to preach the kingdom of God, 
and to rebuke the luxury and vices of its citizens, and to call them 
away from earthly goods, from wealth and pride, to the heavenly 
riches. This He did both by His preaching and His miracles. 
It was here that He healed the paralytic man, who was let down 
through the roof upon a bed. In Capernaum He restored to sight 
two blind men, and healed the dumb man who was possessed of 
a devil. Here, whilst walking in the street, He cured the palsied 
servant of the centurion. Here He healed the woman with an 
issue of blood, who touched the fringe of His garment. Here He 
raised from death Jairus* daughter. 

But when its inhabitants, swelling with pride and luxury, gave 
no heed either to His words or His miracles, and would not be 
moved to repentance, at last He pronounced upon them the 
sentence, “And thou, Capernaum/* &c., chap. xi. 23. 

That it might be fulfilled \ &c. There is an apposition here. 
I. There is the land of Zabulon and Naphtali, which is by the 
way of the sea. 2. There is the country across the Jordan. And 
the whole district was called Galilee of the Gentiles. This land, 
I say, was illuminated by Christ making known the light of the 
Gospel to them that dwelt therein. The word Gentiles here 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


MEANING OF GALILEE. 


I69 


denotes that Christ was about to transfer the Kingdom of God 
from the Jews, because of their unbelief to the Gentiles. So 
S. Chrysostom. 

The people which sal in darkness , Ac. I have expounded this 
prophecy at length in Isaiah ix. 1 : which see. 

From that time Jesus began , &c. This was the sum and the 
scope of the preaching of Christ, to invite men to repentance, to 
change their course of action, and lead them to a holy life. For 
this is true wisdom, this our end, our goal, our good, our happi- 
ness. Truly says the Gloss , “To the Gospel pertains the 
promise of blessedness, the remission of sins, adoption, resurrec- 
tion, the heavenly inheritance, the society of angels. By the 
Gospel, kings are made and a kingdom given, not earthly and 
transitory, but heavenly and eternal.” 

Wherefore Babylas, the play-actor, who had two concubines, 
hearing these words of the Gospel read, Repent , for the kingdom 
of heaven is at hand, being touched by the finger of God, learned 
wisdom, and shut himself up in a cell, to do penance for the rest 
of his life. He left his riches to his concubines, but they too, 
pricked with compunction by his example, also shut themselves 
up in cells, and did continual penance. (See John Moschus, 
Spiritual Meadow, c. 32.) Verily the word of the Gospel is quick 
and powerful. (Heb. iv. 12.) 

Appositely did Christ preach repentance in Galilee because 
Galilee is the same as transmigration, say S. Gregory and 
others, from the root rfo galah, “he migrated.” For in Galilee 
Christ taught men in mind, and affection, and love, to migrate 
from earth to heaven. Wherefore also He chose for apostles 
none but Galilaeans, t\e., migrators, men* who were but pilgrims 
upon earth and citizens of heaven. 

This transmigration is accomplished by penitence. How strict, 
and of how long duration, was the penance upon bread and water 
in former times ! This appears from the Roman Poenitential, and 
from the Penitential Canons of SS. Basil, Gregory Nyssen, and 
Bede, of Rabanus Maurus, and Burchardus, which are still extant 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


NOTABLE EXAMPLES 


*70 

In Spain, the sick and those about to die did penance, clothed in 
the monastic habit, and received the tonsure, by which they made 
profession of a monastic life; and if they afterwards recovered 
they were bound not to return to the world, but to pass the rest of 
their life in a monastery. This appears from the Twelfth Council 
of Toledo, cap. 2. Wamba, king of Spain, a great example to 
posterity, did this about a.d. 674. (See Mariana, and Baronius, 
tom. 8, a.d. 680, in fine.) For this reason the Pontifical Penitentiaries 
at Rome carry a rod in their hands, because they are apostolic 
judges in the tribunal of conscience. For a straight rod is borne 
before a judge as an emblem of the rectitude of justice, according 
to that which is said of Christ, Ps. xlv. 7, “ A rod of direction is 
the rod of thy kingdom ” (Vulg.) ; because also in grave and 
public offences, especially those to which excommunication was 
annexed, the Penitentiaries, reciting the Psalm Miserere , used to 
beat the guilty person with a rod ; and thus they gave absolution, 
as is appointed even now in the ancient ritual of the Church, 
sanctioned by the canons, in solemn absolution from excommuni- 
cation. Thus S. Anno, Archbishop of Cologne, sharply whipped 
the emperor Henry II. as a penance, a.d. 1056, as can be seen in 
his life in Surius. And the use of this discipline, as it is commonly 
called, by rods, inflicted, either by the penitent himself, or by the 
Penitentiary, was very common in the time of blessed Peter 
Damian, who flourished a.d. 1040, as is plain from many of his 
Epistles, also from the life of S. Dominic Loricatus, where he says 
that a hundred years' penance is performed by reciting the whole 
Psalter twenty times, accompanied by constant flagellation, for 
one Psalter so said is equal to five years of penance. 

Thus Henry II., King of England, because he had given occa- 
sion for the murder of S. Thomas, Archbishop of Canterbury, 
came as a penitent, with bare feet, to the tomb of S. Thomas, and 
prostrate on the earth, confessed his sin with tears at the feet of 
the bishops, and, baring his shoulders, received from them five 
flagellations, and from each of the monks, who were eighty in 
number, he received three strokes of the rod. This was about 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



OF ANCIENT PENANCE. I7I 

a.d. 1170. What does our delicateness say to this? What has 
become of the ancient penance? 

Let us hear what S. Jerome says of S. Paula in her epitaph. 
" She did not sleep upon a bed, but upon sackcloth spread upon 
the bare ground, if, indeed, that could be called sleep which was 
interrupted by almost continual prayers, day and night, fulfilling 
the words of the Psalm, “ Every night wash I my bed, and water 
my couch with my tears," You might have thought she was 
possessed of a fountain of tears ; so did she weep over her trifling 
faults, that you might have imagined her guilty of the most 
dreadful crimes. Often did we admonish her to have mercy upon 
her eyes, and preserve them for the reading of the Gospel. But 
she said, “ It is meet that this face should be defiled, which so 
often, against the command of God, has been adorned with cos- 
metics and vermilion. It is meet that this body should be afflicted 
which indulged in so many luxuries. A long laughter shall be 
recompensed with constant weeping. Soft kerchiefs and precious 
silks shall give place to rough sackcloth. I who pleased my 
husband and the world now desire to please Christ ” See the 
same Epistle (30), graphically describing the rare penance of 
Fabiola. 

Jisus walking by the sea f &c. It is not the first vocation of Peter 
and Andrew which is here recorded. This is related by S. John 
(i. 36), among the events of the first year of Christ's ministry. 
The second vocation of Peter and Andrew was after the Baptist's 
imprisonment, when they surrendered themselves at Christ's call 
to become His disciples ; when they constantly cleave to Him, and 
never return to their former occupations. This second calling of 
these Apostles is related both by Matthew and Luke; by the 
former, compendiously ; whilst S. Luke, after his wont, narrates 
the particulars of the history more at length. So S. Chrysostom. 

Walking , not by chance, not merely for recreation, but that He 
might call to Him Peter and Andrew, James and John. Let 
Christians, especially priests and religious, strive to imitate Christ, 
and do nothing aimlessly, but seek fruit in all things. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



172 


CHRIST IS IX 0 Y 2 . 


By the sea of Galilee . Capernaum, where Christ had chosen a 
house for receiving His disciples was near this lake. 

Simon, this is from the Hebrew JJDt? soama, “hearing,” “obey- 
ing.” See what I have said on Gen. xxix. 33. 

Andrew is a Greek name, which the Jews after the time of Alex- 
ander the Great took from the Greeks, together with such names 
as Jason, Lysimachus, Menelaus. (See I Mac. iv, Ac.) Andrew 
means strong, brave. And such indeed S. Andrew was upon his 
cross. 

Casting a net. We must supply from S. Luke, chap, v., that 
Christ went up into Peter's ship, and taught the multitudes from 
thence, that after that He bade Peter cast a net into the sea, which 
immediately caught a vast number of fishes, so that the net brake, 
that by this miracle Peter was converted, together with Andrew, 
James, and John, that then Christ said to them, “ Follow me, and 
1 will make you fishers of men,” as S. Matthew here records. 

Fishers of men . For Christians are like fishes swimming in the 
waters of baptism. 

“ There are merchandise and nets and ropes: 

Death the reward, virtue the prow, the keel is health above ; 

Faith the ropes, true godliness the mast, 

The sail is hope, the oars are grace, the captain is true 1 we.” 

This is the ship of Christ's Church in which we sail to heaven. 
I have noticed nineteen analogies between fishes and men, upon 
Habakkuk i. 14, which if you please you may consult. 

Hence Christ is called by the early Christians IX 0 Y 2 , a Fish, 
because its initial letters make this acrostic, 'Irprovs Xpurros ©cor Yios 
SwTifp, or Jesus Christ the Son of God, the Saviour ; on which 
there is extant a verse of the Erythraean Sibyl in S. Augustine 
( Civ. Dei, 18. 23.) See Tertullian (de Bapt .), and Prosper (part, 
preedict. 2. 39). 

S. Luke says, “ From henceforth thou shalt catch men,” Gr. 
faypuv, i.e. take them alive, catch them for life. S. Ambrose 
translates, “make them live.” As though Christ had said, “ Fisher- 
men take fishes for death, that they may kill them, but thou, O 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


JAMES AND JOHN. 1 73 

Peter, shalt catch men unto life, that they may begin a new life, 
and live unto God in holiness.* 1 

Well does S. Augustine say (Tract. 7 in Joan.), Christ, wishing 
to break the nets of the proud, sought not the fisherman by means 
of the orator, but from the fisherman he gained the emperor. 
Great is Cyprian the orator, but first was Peter the fisherman. 
In this was fulfilled the prophecy of Jeremiah (xvi. 16), “ Behold, 

I will send many fishers, saith the Lord, and they shall fish you.*' 

Leaving their nets. Under the term nets understand also ships, 
houses, occupation, servants, parents, relations, and all other 
things whatsoever, according to that saying of S. Peter to Christ, 
“ Lo ! we have left all things and followed thee." When then we 
read that after Christ's death the Apostles went a-fishing (John 
xxi. 3), we do not understand that they again betook themselves 
to their old vocation, but only did it to pass the time, and to 
divert their minds from the affliction which they were enduring 
at the loss of their Master. 

Wisely does S. Bernard say to those who fear to follow God’s 
call to high and arduous things, " Why dost thou fear ? Why 
dost thou hesitate ? The Angel of great counsel calls thee. No 
one is wiser than He is ; no one is stronger ; no one is more 
faithful." 

Tropologically , the scholiast on S. Jerome says, “ Let us leave the 
spiders’ nets which are the vanities of the world in which we are 
held. 

And going on from thence , &c. James , in Hebrew Jacob, a supplanter; 
for he supplanted the world, and all worldly things, that he 
might follow Christ. 

Zebedee , i.e., liberal , munificent. For though he was an old man 
he willingly gave to Christ his two sons, who were the staff of 
his old age. zabad, means to give , to bestow . 

John, the grace of God , for Christ poured His grace upon John 
more abundantly than upon the rest of the Apostles. “ By this 
apostolic chariot of four horses we are carried to heaven; on 
these four corner-stones the Church was first built." 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



1 74 


CLOUDS OF MIRACLES. 


Ver. 22. — They straightway , &c. Observe Luke (v. 1 1) rolls the 
vocation of these four Apostles into one ; but S. Matthew relates 
the particulars of the calling*: i, of Andrew and Peter; 2, of 
James and John. The historical sequence is as follows — Christ 
having* been carried in Peter’s boat, and having landed on the 
shore, then called Peter and Andrew. Going on a little further, 
he saw James and John mending the nets which had been broken 
by the miraculous draught of fishes ; then He called these two, 
saying, “Follow me." They, being moved by the miracle, and 
the example of their partners, straightway left their father and 
all things, and followed Christ. So S. Augustine ( de Consent . 
Evan . lib. 2, c. 1 7). 

And Jesus went about, &c. Sickness — Greek, votros, — an habitual, 
organic, or incurable disease, says Euthymius. Disease — Greek, 
fmXoKLov — i.e., languor , infirmity, failure of strength. 

And his fame . Greek, olkotj — i.e., rumour , report . Torments (Gr. 
fiao-dvois. This word means, properly, examination under torture, 
when an accused person was tormented on the little horse, to make 
him confess his crime and accomplices. Lunatics are sick per- 
sons, who suffer from the changes of the moon, either by sickness, 
or delirium, or madness, especially epilepsy. Tho. Valesius 
(Sac. Philos . c. 71) denies that the moon has any such effect. 

And healed them . From none of these did Christ require faith, 
says S. Chrysostom, for He had not yet manifested His power ; 
and those who came from far had as yet but small faith in Him. 
But afterwards He required faith on the part of the sick, as will 
appear in the sequel. “ Clouds of miracles," says S. Chrysostom, 
“does S. Matthew pass over in few words, a few of which he 
afterwards relates more at length." 

Mystically, lunatics are mutable and inconstant persons, who at 
one time serve God and religion, at another the devil and their 
lusts, according to the words in Ecclus. xxvii. 12 —“A holy man 
abides in wisdom like the sun, but a fool changes like the moon." 

Followed him. Hear S. Bernard (Serm. I de omnibus Sane.) : 
« From the cities and villages the people followed the preaching 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


DKCAPOLIS. 


*75 


of the Lord. He saved their souls; He healed their bodies. 
They clave to Him, being delighted both by the sight of Him and 
by His words. His voice was sweet, His face was comely, as it is 
written, * Thou art fairer than the children of men ; full of grace 
are thy lips.' Such is He whom we follow, to whom we adhere — 
who is altogether desirable, upon whom not the people only, but 
the holy angels themselves desire to look.” 

Decapolis — the region of ten cities — from Boca ten, and iroXi?, 
a city . The names of these ten cities, according to Burchard, were 
Tiberias, Saphet, Asor, Kedesh, Caesarea Philippi, Capernaum, 
Jotapata (which Josephus defended against the Romans), Beth- 
saida, Corozaim, and Beth-shan, or Scythopolis. 

Beyond Jordan — *>., in respect of Galilee, which was on this side 
Jordan. These regions were Gilead, Trachonitis, Abilene^ Seir, 
Ccelosyria, and Batanaea, the ancient Bashan, formerly the 
dominions of King Og. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



CHAPTER V, 


3 Who are Mated. 14 The Apostles are a Light to the World. 

21 The Law expounded. 

A ND seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain : and when he was 
set, his disciples came unto him : 

2 And he opened his mouth, and taught them, saying, 

3 Blessed are the poor in spirit : for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 

4 Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted. 

5 Blessed are the meek : for they shall inherit the earth. 

6 Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness : for they 
shall be filled. 

7 Blessed are the merciful : for they shall obtain mercy. 

$ B essed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God. 

9 Blessed are the peacemakers : for they shall be called the children of God. 

10 Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness* sake : for theirs is 
the kingdom of heaven. 

II Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute yw, and shall say 
all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake. 

12 Rejoice, and be exceeding glad : for great is your reward in heaven ; for 
so persecuted they the prophets which were before you. 

13 Ye are the salt of the earth : but if the salt have lost his savour, where- 
with shall it be salted ? it is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and 
to be trodden under foot of men. 

14 Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on an hill cannot be hid. 
15 Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a candle- 
stick ; and it giveth light unto all that are in the house. 

16 Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, 
and glorify your Father which is in heaven. 

17 Think not that I am come to destroy the law or the prophets: I am not 
come to desttoy, but to fulfil. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



177 


18 For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle 
shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled. 

19 Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and 
shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven : but 
whosoever shall do and teach than, the same shall be called great in the king- 
dom of heaven. 

20 For I say unto you. That except your righteousness shall exceed the righteous- 
ness of the scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of 
heaven. 

21 Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time. Thou shalt not kill ; 
and whoseover shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment : 

22 But I say unto you. That whosoever is angTy with his brother without a 
cause shall be in danger of the judgment : and whosoever shall say to his 
brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the council : but whosoever shall say, Thou 
fool, shall be in danger of hell fire. 

23 Therefore, if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that 
thy brother hath ought against thee, 

24 Leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way ; first be reconciled to 
thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. 

25 Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way with him ; 
lest at any time the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver 
thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison. 

26 Verily I say unto thee, Thou shalt by no means come out thence, till thou 
hast paid the uttermost farthing. 

27 Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not commit 
adultery. 

28 But I say unto you. That whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her 
hath committed adultery with her already in his heart 

29 And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee : for it 
Is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy 
whole body should be cast into hell. 

30 And if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee : for it is 
profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole 
body should be cast into hell. 

31 It hath been said, Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a 
writing of divorcement : 

32 But 1 say unto you, That whosoever shall put away his wife, saving for the 
cause of fornication, causeth her to commit adultery : and whosoever shall marry 
her that is divorced commitleth adultery. 

33 Again, ye have heard that it hath been said by them of old time, Thou 
shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt perform unto the Lord thine oaths: 

34 But I say unto you, Swear not at all ; neither by heaven ; for it is God’s 
throne : 

35 Nor by the earth ; for it is his footstool : neither by Jerusalem ; for it is the 
city of the great King. 

36 Neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because thou canst not make one 
hair white or black. 

37 But let your communication be, Yea, yea; Nay, nay: for whatsoever it 
tuore than these cometh of evil. 

X 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


178 

3$ Ye have heard that it hath been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for 
a tooth : 

39 But I say unto you, That ye mist not evil : but whosoever shall smite thee 
on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. 

40 And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him 
have thy cloke also. 

41 And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain. 

42 Give to him that asketh thee, and from him that would borrow of thee 
turn not thou away. 

43 Ye have heard that it hath been said. Thou shalt love thy neighbour, 
and hate thine enemy. 

44 But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good 
to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and 
persecute you : 

45 That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he 
maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just 
and on the unjust. 

46 For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye ? do not even the 
publicans the same ? 

47 And if ye salute your brethren only, what do yc more than others t do not 
even the publicans so? 

48 Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect 


Went up into a mountain . Let us inquire what mountain this was ? 
" Some simple brethren," says S. Jerome, “ think that Christ 
taught the Beatitudes, and the things which follow, on the mount 
of Olives. But that was not so." For from what precedes and 
follows in the Gospel the place must have been in Galilee ; in our 
opinion Tabor, or a similarly lofty mountain. Geographies of 
the Holy Land, such as Brochard’s Itinerary , say that this mountain 
is called “Mons Christi," because Christ was wont to pray and 
preach upon it. It lies westward of Capernaum, three miles 
distant ; it is not far from the Sea of Galilee, and is close to the 
city of Bethsaida. Its height is so great that from it may be seen 
the land of Zebulon and Naphthali, Trachonitis, Ituraea, Shenir, 
Hermon, and Libanus. It is carpeted with grass and flowers. 
Here Christ spent whole nights in prayer. Here He called to Him 
His disciples, and chose twelve of their number whom He ordained 
and called apostles. Here He taught that compendium of the new 
law which is called the Sermon on the Mount. Adrichomius says 
the stone on which Christ sat to preach may still be seen. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



time or Christ's sermon. 


179 


Observe, Matthew wished to commence with the preaching of 
Christ, and to deliver the sum of it at the beginning of his Gospel, 
which he did by giving an account ot this discourse, although it 
was actually preached some considerable time after. For many 
events preceded it, which he relates subsequently. The sequence 
of the history was as follows : — After Christ had restored the 
hand of a certain man which was withered, on the Sabbath day 
(Matt. xii. 15), He fled from the anger ot the Scribes, and betook 
Himself to the Sea of Galilee. Here a vast multitude of geople 
flocked to Him, and after He had healed many who were sick, 
He went up into a mountain, where He remained the whole night 
in prayer. In the morning He appointed the twelve Apostles 
(Luke vi. 12). When He had done this He came down from the 
top of the mountain to a lower level, and there He delivered the 
sermon which follows, partly to His disciples and partly to the 
whole multitude. That the people were present at it is plain from 
chap. vii. 28. Moreover, that this is the same sermon of which 
S. Luke gives an account in his sixth chapter is clear, because 
the general thread ot each is the same, and because they have 
the same commencement and the same conclusion. For although 
Matthew has eight Beatitudes and Luke only four, yet in the eight 
of the former are comprised the four of the latter; and in S. Luke's 
four S. Matthew's eight are contained. 

Moreover, Matthew puts off the vocation of the Apostles, which 
preceded the sermon, to the tenth chapter ; for not as yet has he 
related his own calling by Christ, which he gives in chap. ix. 
But it is certain that Matthew as well as the other Apostles 
was present at the sermon. This sermon was delivered about 
the middle of May, and the choosing of the Apostles had taken 
place on the morning of the same day, in Christ's thirty-second 
year, and the second year of His ministry. 

And opening his mouth . To open the mouth is the Hebrew idiom 
for to speak . But there is an emphasis in the expression in this 
place. It means that Christ opened out sublime things — things 
great and wonderful, and Divine mysteries— concerning which He 

n 2 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



i8o 


THE EIGHT BEATITUDES 


had hitherto kept silence. So S. Hilary. S. Bernard says, " He 
opened now His mouth, who afore had opened the mouths of the 
prophets. Truly was His mouth opened, in whom are hid all 
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge." 

Blessed are the poor in spirit . Christ commences His discourse 
with a Beatitude which all seek and covet, though but few find ; 
as David also begins his Book of Psalms, "Blessed is the 
man," &c. 

Blessed \ I say, are the poor in spirit , in hope, not as yet of right ; 
blessed are they in the blessedness of. the way, not of the country; 
blessed in the beginning of peace, of virtue, not in the consumma- 
tion of the crown of glory. Beatitude, says Nyssen, is the special 
endowment of God; w f hen therefore Christ makes blessed the 
po$r in spirit, He makes them partakers of divinity. 

Ouf Lord alludes here to the words of Moses (Deut. xxxiii. 29), 
* Blessed art thou, O Israel, what people is like unto thee, who 
art saved by the Lord ? " For the poor in spirit are Israel, the 
elect people who place their hope, their riches, their salvation 
$nd happiness in the Lord. For because they despise the riches 
of earth, and are lords over them, therefore are they Israel, lords 
with God and in heaven. Moreover, Isidore (lib. 10, Orig. litera 
2?.) says, " Blessed means increased. He is said to be blessed 
who has what he desires, and does not suffer what he would not. 
He then is truly blessed who has all good things for which he 
wishes, and who does not wish for anything which is evil.*' So 
also Varro (lib. 4, deling . Zat.) 9 "He is said to be blessed who 
possesses many good things, as dives x ‘ rich/ comes from divus, ‘ a 
god/ as one who, like God, wants for nothing." And what are 
the real goods Christ here shows — poverty of spirit, meekness, 
holy grief, &c. ; for they who have these things are blessed, and 
therefore they always rejoice. Whence Aristotle derives the 
Greek.word fuucaptos, happy, or blessed, from \aiptiv, to rejoice^ 
because he who is blessed is always rejoicing. 

These eight Beatitudes are, as it were, the eight paradoxes of 
the world. For the world and philosophers place blessedness in 


Digitized by 


Google 



EIGHT PARADOXES. 


1S1 


wealth, not in poverty, in loftiness, not in humility, Ac. Whence 
S. Ambrose says, “According to the Divine judgment blessed- 
ness begins where man deems misery to begin.” Says S. Bernard, 
“The Truth speaks, which can neither deceive nor be deceived. 
It is the Truth which says, Blessed are the poor in spirit: Are ye 
so senseless, O ye sons of Adam, as so greatly to seek for riches 
and desire riches, when the Beatitude of the poor has been com- 
mended and preached to the world by the mouth of God ? Let 
the heathen, who live without God, seek for riches ; let the Jews, 
who believe in earthly promises, seek them ; but with what face 
can a Christian seek them, after Christ has preached, Blessed are 
the poor? 1 * Gregory Nazianzen too says, “The riches of monks 
are in their poverty, their possessions in pilgrimage, their glory 
in contempt, their strength in weakness, their fruitfulness in 
celibacy; who have nothing in the world, and who live above the 
world; who, in the flesh, live out of the flesh; who have the 
Lord for their portion ; who, on account of the kingdom, labour 
in poverty, and, on account of poverty, are kings.”' When Simeon 
Stylites was a keeper of sheep, he heard these Beatitudes of Christ 
read in church, and straightway he left his sheep and entered a 
• monastery. By-and-by he ascended a pillar, and stood upon it) 
day and night, eating little, and becoming a wonder to the world, 
that he might attain to these Beatitudes. The same Simeon was 
wont to preach twice a day to the crowds who flocked to his 
pillar, saying only these words — “Despise earthly things; love 
and desire only heavenly things, which alone will make you 
blessed.” So Theodoret, an eye and ear-witness, testifies jn his 
Life of S. Simeon. 

Blessed are the poor . Not all poor; not those who are poor by a 
pitiable necessity against their will ; not they who acfe poor frbm 
vain glory, or from a desire to be at liberty for the pursuit of 
philosophy, likte Diogenes, or that Crates of Thebes, who, as 
S. Jerome says, threw a vast weight of gold into the sea, saying, 
“ Begone, vyicked pleasures, I sink you, that I may not be made 
to sink by you.” But it is the poor in spirit who are blessed, who 


Digitized by ^ooQle 



POVERTY OF SPIRIT 


182 

have a will inspired by the Holy Ghost, tending* to spiritual goods. 
It is poverty voluntarily undertaken for the sake of God and the 
kingdom of heaven. 

Note, there are three sorts of poor. 1. Those who are so 
actually, as beggars. 2. In spirit, but not actually, as Abraham, 
who was rich in fact, poor in spirit. 3. Both in fact and in spirit, 
as the religious, who vow poverty from love and affection for it, 
and who divest themselves of all their worldly goods. “ Do you 
wish to know,” says Nyssen (lib. de Beatitud .), “who is poor in 
spirit ? It is he who exchanges corporeal opulence for the riches 
of the soul, who is poor for die sake of the spirit, who has thrown 
off earthly riches like a heavy load, and who would be borne aloft 
through the air to be with God. If, then, it behoves us to advance 
to the things above, we must needs be poor and needy in the 
things which drag us down, that we may become conversant with 
things supernal.” 

The word spirit signifies three things: — 1. It is opposed to the 
flesh, and signifies that the subject of this poverty is not the body, 
but the spirit — that is to say, the will. In this sense spirit is often 
used in Scripture. As S. Paul (Rom. i. 9), “God is my witness, 
whom I serve in the spirit.” And Christ says (S. John iv.), 
“ God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him 
in spirit and in truth ” — meaning, that God must be worshipped, 
not with outward ceremonies, but with the inward spirit, and with 
devotion of the mind, according to the saying of Cato— 

“If God be Mind, as poets tell, 

Then with the mind we worship well. ” 

So also S. Bernard says, “ The poor in spirit — with the will 
of the spirit, with spiritual intention and spiritual desire, for die 
alone sake of pleasing God, and the salvation of souls. And 
Christ uses this expression, in spirit , because of those who are poor 
by a miserable necessity, not by a laudable will.” 

2. It is what S. Augustine says, “A rich man, who is able to 
despise in himself whatsoever there is in him by which pride can 
be puffed up, is God’s poor man.” And S. Jerome says, “ The 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



THE ROOT OF ALL VIRTUES. 1 83 

poor in spirit are they who are voluntarily poor because of the 
Holy Spirit.” 

3. In spirit signifies the end of this poverty — namely, that the 
contempt of wealth be referred to the spirit, that, being freed 
from earthly things, we may the better reach forward to heavenly 
things. 

The root and foundation of blessedness and evangelical per- 
fection are voluntary poverty and humility, just as the root of all 
sin is pride and covetousness.” 

Admirably says S. Cyprian ( Tract . de Nativ. Christi ), ‘‘The 
poor are elected, the proud neglected. Neither haughtiness nor 
any such thing obtains a place of discipleship near to Christ. 
Christ, the poor man, despises rich disciples. A poor mother, a 
poor son, a poor hospice, give plain evidence to those who are 
exercised in the school of Christ's Church.” 

Lastly, S. Bernard (Serm. i de Omn. Sane.) : “ Consider how 
prudently Wisdom hath ordained, appointing the first remedy 
against the first sin, as though she said plainly, ‘Wilt thou obtain 
heaven which the proud angel lost, he who trusted in his strength 
and in the multitude of his riches? embrace the lowliness of 
poverty, and it shall be thine.' ” 

Anagogically. Francis of Sales, lately Bishop of Geneva, a man 
equally wise, pious, and holy, says (lib. 12 Theot ., c. 2), “The 
poor, or beggars in spirit are those who beg — t’.e., who have an 
insatiable hunger and thirst for the Spirit — that is, for increase of 
love and zeal for God, that He may ever grow and burn in them 
with constant increase.” 

Hence I have heard the passage expounded thus : Blessed are the 
poor in spirit — *>., blessed are they who are towards God as beggars 
to the rich, namely those who with as great humility of spirit confess 
their poverty, and with as much earnestness beg for grace from 
God, as beggars ask an alms from the rich. Whence S. Chry- 
sostom says, beggars teach us how to pray and ask help of God. 
By showing their wounds and afflicted limbs they excite com- 
passion. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


THE VARIOUS DEGREES 


IS4 

With sound sense does our Lewis (de ponte , pari 3, Mtdii . 2), 
give these three degrees of poverty of spirit, that is, of humility. 
The first is to put off and purify the mind from every blast and 
breath of vanity, and from all vain and inflated presumption, 
despising all the pomps of the world. The second, that I should 
divest myself of all desire to call things my own, by entirely un- 
clothing myself of my own opinions, my own will and other desires. 
The third and last act of poverty is so to empty myself, makr 
myself so poor that I have nothing at all of my own, but only 
what God freely gives me. For I have not even so much as to be, 
my own, but it is of God, without whom I am not. Of myself, 
therefore, I have nothing else than the nothingness of nature — 
not to be , and the negation of grace — i.e, f sin. 

I. You will inquire whether this poverty of spirit be a precept, 
or an evangelical counsel? And 2. How many degrees and 
kinds of it there are ? I answer, it has various degrees, some of 
counsel, some of precept. The first and highest is to forsake all 
riches, all transitory things for the sake of the love and imitation 
of Christ, with inward purpose as well as outward deed, like the 
Apostles and religious. This degree is of counsel, not of precept. 
The second is to bear patiently the confiscation of goods for the 
sake of Christ and the orthodox faith, which is a kind of martyr- 
dom ; for he who takes away the means necessary for the support 
of life, takes away life itself. This is what many rich and nobly 
bora Catholics are suffering this day in England, who would 
prefer death to the spoiling of their goods. For it is a hard thing 
indeed to deprive not only yourself but your children and all 
your posterity of their hereditary possessions, and the rank and 
position of their ancestors, and reduce all to poverty and obscurity. 
But all the more honour to them who do it for Christ’s sake, for 
theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Such, too, were the Hebrew 
Christians whom the Apostle praises, “ Ye took joyfully the spoiling 
of your goods, knowing that ye have a better and an enduring 
substance.” (Heb. x. 34.) 

This degree is of precept, for we are bound for the sake of 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



OF POVERTY OF SPIRIT. 1 8 $ 

Christ and the Faith, not only to lose our goods, but to shed our 
blood. 

The third grade of poverty is to bear patiently the spoiling of 
our goods, or any injustice done to us by those who are powerful, 
and tyrants, as when any one loses a just suit on behalf of an estate^ 
or other things, because of the power or tyranny of his opponents. 

The fourth is when wealth is given to any one by God, not to 
care for it, to give it up in intention, to be prepared to forsake it 
if that should be for the greater glory of God. In this grade was 
Abraham, rich in respect of actual possessions, but poor in spirit. 

5. To prefer to be contented with a little in a station where you 
have greater opportunities of serving God, than one where you 
can have more wealth but less godliness. 

6. To have wealth, but to spend it upon the poor, and pious 
objects, even to depriving yourself of necessaries. 

7. To prefer to be poor rather than acquire riches by means of 
injustice, irreligion, or any other wickedness. Such was Tobit, 
who, when he was dying, left this testimony to his son: “Fear 
not, my son ; we are poor it is true, but we shall have great riches 
if we fear God.” Of these grades of poverty, the second and 
seventh are of precept; the first, the fourth, and the fifth of 
counsel ; the third and the sixth of counsel, or of precept, accord- 
ing to circumstances. 

You will ask, secondly, why Christ assigns to poverty of spirit 
the first place among the evangelical Beatitudes ? I answer, the 
first reason isd priori, because this poverty overturns and destroys 
covetousness, which is the root and well-spring of all evil, (i Tim. 
vi. 10.) Wherefore this poverty restores man, as it were, to the 
state of innocence, in which nothing was his own, but all things 
were common to all. For the whole world was Adam’s and his 
children's, that from it they might acknowledge, love, and praise 
God, there being no assertion of property, which is the root of 
cupidity, quarrels and law-suits. “With the poor, therefore,” 
says S. Gregory, “what the superfluity of very slight pravity 
defiles, the furnace of poverty purifies.” 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



1 86 


BENEFITS OF POVERTY. 


The second reason is, because this poverty releases men from 
a thousand distractions and anxious cares which riches, and the 
desire of riches, bring* with them. Wherefore, “ poverty is a 
tranquil harbour," says S. Chrysostom ; “ it is the training* 
ground, the gymnasium of wisdom." Here comes in that reason 
of S. Gregory’s (Horn. 32 in Evang .) that “ naked with the naked 
(demons) we must wrestle ; for if one who is clothed wrestle with 
one who is naked, he will soon be cast down to the ground, 
because he has that by which he may be laid hold ot. For what 
are all earthly things but bodily habiliments, as it were ? Let 
him, therefore, who is about to contend with the devil cast off his 
garments lest he be worsted. Let him possess nothing in this 
world by desire; let him require no delectations of fleeting 
things, lest, where his desires keep him, there he be held until he 
fall." 

Third. Because this poverty causes a man to withdraw himselt 
from all created things, and makes him rest entirely with all his 
hopes in God his Creator. In the full and perfect love of God, the 
summit of virtue and the true blessedness of this life consist. 

Wherefore, S. Bonaventura writes, in his Life of S. Francis, 
that when he was often asked by his brethren which was the 
virtue which especially commends us to Christ our Lord, and 
makes us pleasing to Him, he was wont to reply with more than 
his usual energy, "Poverty, for it is the way of salvation, the 
incentive to humility, the root of perfection ; and from it there 
spring many fruits, though they be hidden and known to but 
few." 

These are the causes why Christ taught us this poverty of spirit 
both by word and example. Thus did the Blessed Virgin, the 
Apostles, the Essenes, yea all the first Christians, of whom it 
was said (Acts iv. 32), “ Neither said any of them that ought 
which he possessed was his own, but they had all things common." 
Indeed, they vowed this ; wherefore Ananias and Sapphira, who 
broke this vow, were punished by the Apostle Peter with sudden 
death. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



THX FRANCISCAN FRIARS. I87 

There followed in holy poverty apostolic men and prelates, 
SS. Anthony, Augustine, Basil, Chrysostom, Jerome, and S. 
Alexius, who, by an example uncommon in the world, relinquished 
ample riches, a bride, and poor and a stranger followed Christ, a 
poor man, to Syria — as it were, a pilgrim upon earth and a 
citizen of heaven ; and at last lived and died unrecognized in his 
father’s house, being made a laughing-stock to the world, or 
rather sporting with the world, and making it a laughing-stock. 
In a later age S. Benedict, S. Bernard, but above all S. Francis, 
embraced poverty, and taught their disciples to embrace it. S. 
Francis made it the foundation of his Order. In all his discourses 
he spoke of it now as his mother, now as his wife, his lady ; often, 
too, he called it his queen, because it had shone with such 
glorious refulgence in Christ the King of kings, and in His 
Mother. Hear what he solemnly enjoins upon his friars in his 
Rule, c. 6: “Let the brothers appropriate nothing to themselves, 
neither house, nor place, nor anything; but as pilgrims and 
strangers in this world, serving the Lord in poverty and humility, 
let them ask boldly for alms. Neither need they be ashamed, for 
the Lord made Himself poor for us in this world. This is that 
sublimity of the deepest poverty which constitutes you, my 
dearest brethren, heirs and kings of the kingdom of heaven. Let 
this be your portion, which leads you to the land of the living. 
And, my dearly beloved brethren, cleaving wholly to this, wish, 
for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to have nothing else for 
ever under heaven.” 

The same S. Francis, exulting in destitution, prayed for it with 
such fervour that fire seemed to shine from his face. “ For this,” 
said he, “ is the virtue flowing into us from heaven, which so 
orders and informs us that we gladly trample upon all earthly 
things, and which removes every obstacle so that the mind of man 
may be most freely and speedily united to the Lord God. It is 
poverty which makes a man’s soul, while it is yet upon earth, hold 
converse with the angels in heaven. It is this which has fellow- 
ship with Christ on His Cross, which is buried with Him in His 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



DEATH OF S. FRANCIS. 


1 83 

tomb, which with Him rises again and ascends into heaven. It is 
this which grants to the souls which love it the power, even in 
this life, of flying above the heavens, and bestows pinions of 
humility and charity. Let us go forward, then, to ask the holy 
Apostles that they will obtain this grace for us from the Lord 
Jesus Christ, that He, the chief cultivator of poverty, would deign 
to bestow it upon us.” 

And as S. Francis lived, so he died, for, divesting himself of his 
outer garments, he lay upon the earth, saying, “ I have done with 
what is mine, what is yours ; may Christ instruct you.” Then a 
brother, who stood by, foreseeing by a divine instinct his death 
and zeal for poverty, offered him his cord with femorals, and said, 
“ These I lend thee, as a beggar, and do thou receive them by 
the mandate of holy obedience.” With joy did the holy man 
take them, and, lifting up his hands to heaven, gave thanks to 
Christ, because, having put of! every burden, he was going free 
to Him, and because, as in life, so in death, he was conformed to 
Christ crucified, who hung naked upon the Cross. 

For theirs , &c. — It is just and congruous that those who for the 
love of Christ despise the riches of the earthly kingdom should 
be recompensed with the wealth of the heavenly kingdom, yea 
indeed, of an earthly kingdom, which by despising they possess 
and rule, according to the saying of S. Paul, “ Having nothing, 
and yet possessing all things.” Wherefore Climacus ( Gradu 17) 
does not hesitate to affirm that a poor monk is the lord of the 
world, and through faith possesses all nations as his servants. And 
he adds that a poor servant of God loves nothing wrongly, for 
all things which he has, or can have, he reckons as though they 
were not, and if it chance that they depart, he counts them as 
dung. Hear S. Bernard ( Scrm . 21 in Cant.) : “Blessed are the poor 
in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Let not men 
suppose that they possess only heavenly things, because they hear 
them only named in the promise. They possess earthly things 
likewise, and indeed as though having nothing and yet possessing 
all things, the less they desire the more are they masters. 


Digitized by C^ooQle 


HIS ORDER FOUNDED ON POVERTY. 1 89 

Lastly, to a believer there is a whole world of riches. A whole 
world, indeed, because both prosperous and adverse things are 
equally his servants, and work together for his good. And so, a 
covetous man hungers after earthly things tike a beggar, the 
believer despises them as a master. The one by possessing loses, 
the other by despising keeps. S. Chrysostom gives the reason 
{Hon 1. 57, ad pop .): “God is the poor man's steward." And S. 
Francis lays it down in his Rule thus: — “This evangelical 
poverty is the foundation of our Order. On this the whole super- 
struction of our Order primarily rests, that by its abiding firm, 
the Order may be firm ; and if it be overturned the Order will be 
entirely overthrown. In so far therefore as the friars shall 
decline from poverty, the world shall decline from them. If they 
embrace my Lady Poverty, the world will feed them, because they 
are sent for the salvation of the world. There is a bargain 
between the world and the friars. They owe the world a good 
example : the world owes them necessary provision. And when 
becoming false to their trust, they fail to set a good example, the 
world, as a just censure, will draw back its hand." And indeed 
it is as good as a great and perpetual miracle to see so many 
religious men and women of the Order of S. Francis — for in the 
whole world they number quite a million — who have made pro- 
fession of poverty, who live honestly and suitably on the alms of 
the faithful. Truly in this does the Providence of God over His 
own poor shine gloriously. Here is fulfilled' that saying of the 
Psalmist which S. Francis gave to his brothers as their viaiicum 
in daily life — “Cast thy care upon the Lord, and He will 
nourish thou." And “They that be rich, want and are hungry, 
but they that seek the Lord shall not be lacking in any good." 

Observe, Christ does not say the kingdom of heaven shall be given 
them, or shall be theirs, but theirs is the kingdom Of heaven, in this 
present time. That is to say, “By my promise and God’s decree 
the kingdom of heaven pertains to them, they have a complete 
right to it, and so they are sure of entering into it, as sure as though 
they held it in their hands, and were already reigning in it as 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



190 


THE MEEK. 


kings/' For so firm is the hope of the promises of God, that by it 
the faithful as it were hold in their hands the thing promised, 
according to Heb. xi. I, “ Faith is the substance of tilings hoped 
for," faith, that is, which makes the celestial goods, for which he 
hopes, subsist in the mind of a believer. For in this way he 
realizes them to himself, as it were, substantially shows them to 
himself. 

The kingdom of heaven. The celestial blessedness is so called, 
where the blessed reign with God in all felicity and glory, through 
all eternity. The word kingdom here signifies, i. The abundance 
of all good things in heaven. 2. The high dignity wherewith the 
blessed are honoured by the Holy Trinity and all angels. 3. Their 
regal dignity. For the blessed are kings, who reign not over one 
Spain, or one Asia, or even over all the earth, but over the whole 
universe; that is, over all the elements of the sky, over the plants 
and animals. This empire they have won by their poverty of 
spirit, wherewith they put under them all earthly goods and 
desires, where, wearing their golden crowns, they sing joyfully 
for ever to Christ. “ Thou hast made us to our God a kingdom 
and priests, and we shall reign upon the earth." (Rev. v. 10, 
Vulg.) The kingdom of heaven then is the kingdom of God, 
for the blessed possess the same kingdom which God himself 
possesses, and in it most happily and most gloriously reign 
with him eternally. 

Blessed are the meek. This is the second Beatitude in the Latin 
Vulgate followed by SS. Jerome and Augustine, and the rest of 
the Latin Fathers. But in the Greek Codices, in the Syriac and 
Arabic versions, followed by S. Chrysostom and the other Greek 
Fathers it is the third Beatitude, the second with them being, 
Blessed are they that mourn . 

Congruously to the poor in spirit the meek are joined 
because the poor and lowly are wont to be meek, as vice versd the 
rich are proud and often impatient and quarrelsome. Poverty 
and meekness are neighbours, and related virtues. Whence the 
Hebrew words aw\ “ poor," W anan, 44 meek," are kindred words. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


DEGREES OF MEEKNESS. 


I 9 I 

Chromatius adds, “ A man cannot be meek unless he be first poor 
in spirit.*' He gives the reason, “ There cannot be a calm sea 
unless the winds are stilled. A fire is not put out unless you with- 
draw the materials by which it bums. So too the mind will not 
be meek and quiet unless the things which excite and inflame it 
be put away." The meek are they who are gentle, humble, 
modest, simple in faith, patient under all injury, who set themselves 
to follow the precepts of the gospel and the example of the saints. 
Christ here alludes to Ps. xxxvii. 1 i,“The meek-spirited shall pos- 
sess the earth, and shall be refreshed with the multitude of peace." 
Meekness, therefore, 1. Makes us pleasing to God and men. 2. 
Like Christ, who says, “ Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in 
heart.* 3. Apt for wisdom and gaining celestial goods. For 
these the meek heart is fitted to receive, according to what the 
Psalm says, “Them that are meek shall he guide in judgment, 
and such as are gentle them shall he learn his way." 

The grades of meekness and the Beatitude consequent upon it 
are these u I. To converse with all with a meek heart and lips. 
2. To break the anger of others by a meek reply. 3. To bear 
with gentleness all injuries and wrongs. 4. To rejoice in such 
things. 5. By our meekness and kindness to overcome the male- 
volence of our enemies and those who are angry with us, and win 
them to be our friends. 

For they shall possess , &c. Gr. KXrjpovo/xyrovcri, t\e., shall possess by 
inheritance . S. Augustine and the Arabic have shall inherit . The 
Syriac, shall possess the earth by the right of inheritance . Appositely 
does Christ promise the earth to the meek, because the meek are 
often despoiled by the quarrelsome of the goods of the earth. 
This injury therefore Christ makes up to them by this Beatitude. 
But what earth does He mean ? 

I. S. Chrysostom, Euthymius, Theophylact, and S. Augustine, 
say that the present earth is here promised to the meek, in this 
way. The world calls blessed those who are strong and who 
avenge themselves; but I say, Blessed are die meek, and they 
who bear with patience the good things of this world being torn 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



192 


THE HEAVENLY LAND. 


from them, because although such persons are often oppressed by 

the world, yet they do often also, by the gift of God, possess their 

» 

own, firmly and quietly. Or if not, yet the whole world is the 
meek man’s country. There is an allusion to Moses who was the 
meekest of men, and who by his meekness obtained for the 
Hebrews from God the possession of the promised land. This 
sense is true, but neither full nor adequate. It often fails. We 
often see the meek deprived of their possessions by the quarrel- 
some. We may add that Moses promised earthly goods to the 
Jews, but Christ promised heavenly things to Christians. 

Better and fuller with S. Jerome (in loc .), Nyssen (lib. de Beat., 
Orat . 2), S. Basil (on Psalm xiv.), Cyril (in cap . 58 Isaiah ), by earth 
in this place, understand heaven, which is the land of the living, 
as this our earth is the land of the dying, as it is said in Psalm xxvii. 
“ I believed verily to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of 
the living.” And Psalm cxlii., “Thou art my hope and my 
portion in the land of the living.” 

For in heaven, indeed, is a land not dense, opaque, and earthy, 
but pure and lustrous. There is the Paradise of roses and lilies, 
of gems and all delights which refresh the senses of . the blessed, 
for were it not so, the bodies and senses of the blessed, which in 
this life suffered such dire and awful martyrdoms, would go with- 
out their own deserts of pleasure, and only their minds and souls 
be blessed, which is absurd. Whence S. John beheld (in Rev. xxi. 
and xxii.) a heavenly city which was foursquare, whose founda- 
tions were laid with jasper and every precious stone. Hence also 
the Pythagoreans, as Clement of Alexandria tells us (lib. 5 Stromat.), 
speak of heaven as dvrlx/Bova, i>., the land over against, or opposed 
to our earth. I say nothing of those philosophers who think that 
the moon and the stars are inhabited, that there are in the moon 
populous cities and vast regions inhabited by men called Zunares, 
from Luna , as Macrobius says, lib. I in Somn . Scipionis . See also 
what Plato says, in Convivio . 

By every one of the Beatitudes the kingdom of heaven is pro- 
mised, but under various names and titles. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



THE NEW EAETH. 


*93 


And yet again, by earth in this place we may understand the 
uew earth , which is spoken of (Isa. lxv. 17; Rev. xxi. 1, 2; and 
2 Pet. iii. 13) as that globe of the world which is to be subjected to 
Christ after the general Judgment, as His inheritance, and there- 
fore to the meek as His fellow heirs. For after the Judgment, the 
whole universe — that is, both the heavens and the earth — will be 
renewed and glorified, and made the possession of Christ and His 
saints. 

A certain holy man, says Salmeron, once said, pleasantly, 
“ Heaven is given to the humble, and earth to the meek ; what 
remains to the proud and the cruel except the misery of hell ? ” 
Anagogically , Hilary says, “To the meek is promised the 
inheritance of the earth — i.e. of that body which the Lord assumed 
as his habitation, because through the meekness of our minds 
Christ dwelleth in us, and we also, when we are glorified, shall 
be clothed with the glory of His body.” And S. Leo ( Serm . in 
Fest . Omn. Sand .) says, “The land promised to the meek, and 
to be given in possession to the gentle, is the flesh of the saints, 
which, as the desert of their humility, shall be changed at the 
blessed Resurrection, and endowed with the grace of immortality. 
For the meek shall possess that land in perfect peace, and nothing 
shall ever be diminished of their rights, when this corruptible 
shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on 
immortality.” 

Finally, the way of attaining to meekness is (1), often to 
meditate upon its dignity and profit, and upon the unworthiness 
and unprofitableness of anger. Whence Clement of Alexandria 
says, that Ather.odorus gave this advice to the Emperor Augustus, 
that if he were angry he should never do or say anything until 
he had said over to himself the twenty-four letters of the alphabet. 
“If,” said he, “ thou art of a lofty mind, a prince is superior to all 
injuries.” Augustus despised the tales of detractors, “ For,” said 
he, “ in a free State the tongue should be free.” 

A better way is, to consider the example of those who are 
meek, and to follow them, but especially the example of Christ 

o 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


194 


EXAMPLE OF S. EPHRAIM. 


crucified, of whom Isaiah foretold (chap, liii.), “He shall be led as 
a sheep to the slaughter, and like a lamb before its shearers, he 
shall make himself dumb.” 

Blessed are they that mourn . Arabic, the sad ’ who mourn, not in 
flesh but in spirit. For the words, in spirit , are to be understood 
and repeated in all these Beatitudes. Blessed are they that mourn, 
not for the loss of wealth, or parents, or friends, but of spiritual 
things. Grief here is taken as belonging to the saints. It is 
opposed to those who laugh and overflow with joy on account of 
mundane prosperity, those whom the world applauds as blessed. 
To them Christ threatens woe . “ Woe to you which laugh now, 
for ye shall mourn and weep.” There is an allusion to Isaiah 
lxv. 14, “Behold, my servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry ; 
behold, my servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty ; behold, my 
servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed,” &c. 

This grief too has its own degrees, like the rest of the Beatitudes. 
They are here called blessed mourners , who bear with patience the 
troubles and sorrows sent, or permitted to come upon them by 
God. So Nyssen, de Beatitud. But more blessed are they who 
mourn and weep on account of their own or others’ sins. And 
most blessed are they who through grief at the perpetual 
struggle which they carry on with the flesh and concupiscence, 
and through desire of the celestial country, and especially 
through love of God and Christ, lament their exile in this earthly 
land. Thus Paul mourned, “O wretched man that I am, who 
shall deliver me from the body of this death r ” In this grief 
S. Ephraim excelled, who mourns in all his writings, and 
inspires his readers with holy grief and compunction. S. 
Macarius, as his Life records, was wont to say to his brethren, 
“ Let us weep, brothers, let our eyes run down with tears before 
we go where our tears shall burn our flesh.” And they all wept 
For tears wash us in this world but burn us after death. 

For they shall be comforted. Often in this life, but always in the 
life to come. As Isaiah says (xxxv. 10), “Everlasting joy shall 
be upon their heads; they shall obtain joy and gladness, and 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


SPIRITUAL HUNGER. 


195 

sorrow and sighing shall flee away." Truly does compunction 
itself wonderfully solace and refresh the mind of him who is 
pricked with compunction. And if there be unadulterated joy in 
the world, it is in the contrite mind. Taste, and thou shalt see, for 
as the heart knoweth his own bitterness, so there is a joy with 
which a stranger intermeddleth not. So S. Jerome describing the 
„ departure of S. Paula, exclaims, “ O blessed exchange ! She wept 
to laugh always : she beheld pools of contrition that she might 
find the Lord her fountain : she was clothed in sackcloth that now 
she might wear white robes, and say, ‘Thou hast put off my sack- 
cloth, and girded me with gladness/ She ate ashes as it were 
bread, and mingled her drink with weeping, saying, ‘ My tears 
have been my meat day and night/ that now she might feed for 
ever on angels* bread, and sing, ‘O taste and see how sweet the 
Lord is/ ” 

Blessed are they that hunger , &c. The meaning both here and in 
S. Luke, who omits after righteousness , is the same. Blessed are 
they who hunger after food and drink, in a spiritual sense, t\e., 
not from any bodily necessity, but with a spiritual end and in- 
tention. They hunger and thirst after righteousness, because 
they wish by such hunger to increase righteousness in themselves 
and their neighbours. Maldonatus explains righteousness or 
justice (Juslitiam ) to mean, on aceount of justice . Hence S. Luke 
(vi. s) opposes these hungry ones to such that are full, sc. with wine 
and delicacies. Woe to you that are full , for ye shall hunger. The 
world calls blessed those that are full, but I, says Christ, 
call those who are hungry and thirsty with maceration of the 
flesh, so long as it is on account of their eagerness to obtain and 
augment righteousness, happy. So S. Jerome, Ambrose, 
Augustine, Hilary, Nyssen, Euthymius, Theophilus, and others. 
Thus hunger, or famine, is to be understood not in a corporeal, 
but a spiritual sense (Amos viii. n) : “Behold, the days come, 
saith the Lord, that I will send a famine upon the land, not a 
famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the word 
of the Lord/' Also Ecclus. xxiv. 29: “They that eat me 

0 2 


Digitized by LjO' le 


196 


THE POWER OF JUSTICE. 


(wisdom) shall yet be hungry, and they that drink me shall yet 
be thirsty ." To these words Christ here alludes. 

The ist degree of this Beatitude is to bear patiently hunger 
or thirst arising from public or private scarcity of food. The 
2nd, to hunger and thirst in voluntary fasting, that by your fast- 
ing, you may make satisfaction for your sins, and gain the grace of 
God for yourselves and your neighbours. The 3rd is, for the faith 
of Christ to endure prisons, and in them hunger and thirst, even 
unto death, as befell some of the martyrs. The 4th, to hunger 
and thirst after righteousness, and the increase of all virtue. 
Whence S. Leo says, “ To love God is nothing else than to love 
righteousness." 

Righteousness . I. Righteousness or justice may here betaken for 
that special virtue which gives to every one their right. As if it were 
said, “ Blessed are they who hunger for justice, who eagerly 
desire that justice which once fled from the world, according to 
that verse of Ovid, 

*' Last, the lands, all wet with slaughter. 

Left Astraea, Heaven’s own daughter,” 

that she may return again to earth, and rule over the whole 
world, and defend the right. Such are they who, oppressed by 
tyrants, or unjust men, desire that their rights may be restored. 
Such are they who see widows and orphans oppressed, and have 
an ardent longing to see them rescued from injustice, and their 
oppressors punished. For as Aristotle ( Ethics ) says, “ Neither 
the evening star, nor the sun shines as brightly as justice." 
And as Cicero says (lib. 2 de Offic.), " So great is the force of 
justice, that not even those who feed on evil-doing and wicked- 
ness can live in them without some particle of justice." 

2. And more fully, take righteousness here to mean a generic 
term for virtue, yea, the circle of all virtues, because, for it we 
ought not only to wish, but vehemently to hunger after and covet 
it, that we may fill our soul with virtues. 

Hear what S. Bernard says (Eptst. 253 ad G annum), explaining 
the insatiable desire of profiting in the righteous. “The just 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



THE HEAVENLY LADDER. 


197 


man never deems that he has apprehended, never says it is 
enough, but is always hungering and thirsting after righteous- 
ness ; so that if he lived always, he would be always striving, as 
far as in him lies, to be more just, always endeavouring with all 
his might to go on from good to better, not merely for a year or 
some set time, like a hireling, but for ever he would surrender 
himself to the Divine service. Therefore unwearied zeal in 
making progress, and constant striving after perfection, is 
counted perfection." And then he concludes with a reference to 
Jacob's ladder. 

"Jaco^ beheld a ladder, and on the ladder angels, but none of 
them resting or standing still ; but all were either ascending or 
else descending ; whereby is given plainly to understand that in 
the state of this mortal life there can no middle course be found 
between going forward and going back. For just as our body 
is perpetually either increasing or decreasing, so also must the 
soul be either making progress or else going backward." 

Well says S. Augustine, “ The whole life of a good Christian is 
holy desire." 

For they shall , &c. " God will give here a constant increase of 

His grace to those who hunger after it." "And in heaven," says 
S. Bernard, a eternal hunger shall be recompensed with eternal 
refection." 

Blessed are the merciful . Mercy is joined to justice because 
every work of virtue is either of debt, which is justice, or else of 
free gift, which is mercy, and because mercy tempers and sweetens 
justice. Worldlings count those blessed who give little and 
receive much : but Christ pronounces a paradox, which yet is 
most true, "It is more blessed to give than to receive" (Acts 
xx. 35), where I have gone fully into the reasons of this Beatitude, 
especially this one, " for they shall obtain mercy." 

The same celestial Beatitude which Christ promised to the poor 
in spirit, under the name of the kingdom of heaven , He here promises 
to the merciful by the name of mercy , because, as the Apostle says 
(Rom. vi. 23), "life eternal is of grace," both because God 


Digitized by Google 


DEGREES OF MERCY. 


I98 

promises it freely to those who do well and give alms, as because 
grace is the beginning of good works and merit. For grace 
prevents and stirs us up to good works, and gives them a divine 
worthiness and power of meriting. “Life eternal/' says S. 
Augustine (de Corrept . et Gratis c. 13), “is grace for grace — that 
is, grace for the merits which grace has conferred/' according to 
that in Ps. ciii., “Who crowneth thee with mercy and com- 
passions'' (Vulg.). Whence the Syriac renders, Blessed are the 
merciful, for mercies shall be upon them . As though He said, To the 
merciful shall be recompensed \ not one but many mercies . God, therefore, 
bestows upon the merciful life and everlasting glory, which is the 
highest grace, and is here signified by the name of mercy, for, as 
S. Augustine says ( Epist . 105), “When God crowns our merits, 
He does nothing else than crown His own gifts/' 

The degrees of mercy are : 1. To sympathize with the wretched. 
2. To alleviate corporeal misery by alms. 3. To bring succour 
to the ignorance of the mind, or to those who are burdened with 
sin. 4. To seek out the wretched, that we may help them. 5. 
To deprive yourself of advantages in order to succour them. 6. 
To spend all you are and all you have, even life itself, for them, 
as Christ, S. Paul, and S. Paulinus did. 

Symbolically . Mercy — i.e., the vision and possession of God, and 
God Himself, is promised. For the nature of God is nothing else 
than mercy, according to the words of the fifty-ninth Psalm, “ My 
God my mercy." (Vulg.) Give therefore to the poor, and you 
receive God. For alms is not so much mercy as a vast interest 
and usury with God. Whence the saying : “If you wish to be a 
usurer lend to God." As it is in Proverbs, “ He that giveth unto 
the poor lendeth unto the Lord, and what he layeth out it shall be 
paid him again." As S. Chrysologus says (Serm. 42), “God 
eateth the bread in heaven which the poor man hath received on 
earth. Give, then, your bread, give your drink, if you would have 
God for your debtor instead of your judge." Powerfully writes 
S. Augustine (on Ps. xxxvii.),“ Consider what the usurer does : he 
wishes to give little and gain much. Do thou the same. Give 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



DEGREES OF PURITY. 


199 


small things, receive great. Behold how wonderfully your 
interest grows. Give temporal things, receive eternal. Give 
earth, receive heaven.” Lastly, S. Chrysostom (Horn. 32 in Epist. 
ad Heb.) says, “ Almsgiving is a virgin who hath golden wings, 
and is seen of all. She hath a beautiful girdle. Her face is gentle 
and comely. Her carriage is graceful, and she always stands 
before the throne of the King. When we are judged, straightway 
she comes to our aid, and delivers us from punishment, over- 
shadowing us with her wings. God Himself loves her better than 
innumerable sacrifices.” 

Blessed are the pure in heart . I. A pure heart means a chaste 
mind, free from all lust and carnal concupiscence. As though 
He said, Blessed, not those who have a clear intellect, as philo- 
sophers, nor yet those who have clean and fashionable clothes, 
which many cannot have, but who have a pure and chaste mind 
which all can have. So. S. Chrysostom. 

2. And more fully : Blessed are those who have a pure con- 
science — those, namely, who have cleansed it from every stain of 
sin, from evil thoughts and desires, from passions and pertur- 
bations, from all evil intention, and especially from all duplicity 
and hypocrisy. Thus if a fountain be pure and unmuddy, so will 
the waters which flow from it be pure and unmuddy likewise ; 
and if the heart be pure, the actions which spring from it will be 
pure and clean. So S. Jerome. 

3. And most fully: They are in the highest grade of purity of 
heart, who have cleansed their hearts from all creature love, that 
their hearts may be like that of an angel — a pure mirror— and 
shrine of the Deity. 

Cassian (lib. 6 de Instit . Renunc ., c. 10) gives it as a mark of 
perfect purity of heart when any one has no impure dreams, but 
all his visions are pure and holy. Moreover, Cassian and Sulpitius, 
(lib. 4 Vit. Pat., c. 31) describe the ladder by which we may 
mount by degrees to this purity. “ The beginning of our salvation 
is the fear of the Lord. Of the fear of the Lord is born whole- 
some compunction. From compunction proceedeth contempt of 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



200 


HOW TO PROPHESY. 


possessions, and divesting ourselves of them. From this divesting 
proceeds humility. Of humility is generated mortification of the 
will. By mortification of the will all vices are rooted out. When 
vices are expelled, virtues fructify and increase. By the growth 
of virtues purity of heart is gained. By purity of heart the per- 
fection of apostolic charity is possessed.*' 

Wherefore S. Anthony, according to S. Athanasius, teaches 
that purity of heart is the way to prophecy. “ If any one would 
be in a position," he says, “ to know future events, let him have a 
clean heart, for I believe that the soul which serves God, if it shall 
persevere in that wholeness in which it has been bom again, is 
able to know more than the demons. Such was the soul of 
Eliseus, who was wont to perform miracles unknown to others." 

For they shall see God — i.e., face to face, and shall be blessed 
with the vision of God. “ Cleanness of heart, and purity of con- 
science," says Chromatius, " will suffer no cloud to obscure the 
vision of God." Hear S. Leo (&rw. in Fest, Omn . Sanct .) : “ Let 
all the mists of earthly vanities pass away, and let the interior 
eyes be cleansed from all squalor of iniquity, that the purified 
sight may feed only upon the vision of God." Hence it is plain, 
as S. Augustine says, that God is seen by the blessed, not with 
the eyes, but with the heart — />., with the mind. 

Lastly, this vision of God may be understood to mean the pure 
and affectionate knowledge which He often imparts in greater 
degree in this life to the pure in heart than to others. Let, then, 
every one say, with Herminius, “ I had rather die than be defiled 
in heart." 

Blessed are the peacemakers . As though Christ said, The world 
calls blessed those who bravely wage war, and subdue their 
enemies, but I pronounce those to be blessed who reconcile those 
who quarrel and fight, and recall them to peace and union among 
themselves and with God. This, indeed, is a work arduous and 
difficult, but one most pleasing to God. So S. Chrysostom, &c. 
(See S. Gregory, 3 p. Pastor . Admonil . 24.) 

The degrees of this Beatitude are — 1. To have or procure in- 


Digitized by ^ooQle 



ORDER OF PEACEMAKERS. 


201 


ward peace of soul with God. 2. To cultivate peace with neigh- 
bours and friends.- 3. To recall those who disagree to the concord 
of charity. The 4th grade is to make others like ourselves, by 
instilling into them a zeal for peace, that they too may study to 
make peace between those who disagree. 

There might be a religious order or congregation instituted 
to promote this object, with great profit to the Church, in the 
same way that congregations have been instituted for the pro- 
motion of the other works of mercy — such as nursing the sick, 
showing hospitality to strangers, burying the dead, &c. Similarly, 
there might be founded a congregation of peacemakers, whose 
office it would be to quell all lawsuits in a city, and to bring 
back all who quarrelled to concord and charity. For this is an 
exemplary work of charity, in which one Father (Gaspar Barzaus, 
of Goa) so excelled, that the lawyers said they should die of 
hunger, in consequence of his putting an end to all the litigations 
by which they gained a living. (See his Life, written by Father 
Trigantius.) In fact, in some cities, such congregations of peace- 
makers have been founded, by which much harm arising from 
discords, strifes, hatreds, has been warded from the common- 
wealth. 

For they shall he called , &c., t.e., they shall he sons of God \ For 
God very greatly loveth peace, and for its sake He sent His Son 
into the world. For He Himself is in His essence peace and 
union : for God Himself unites and joins in closest union the 
Three Divine Persons in one and the same undivided Essence and 
Godhead. Hence God is called the God of peace (Philip, iv.); 
as, on the contrary, the devil is a god of contention, and they 
who sow it are sons of the devil. 

2. Peacemakers are called the sons of God, because they 
share in the name and office of Christ the Son of God, whose 
office it is to reconcile men to God and one another, and to 
bring to the world that peace which the world cannot give. 
Whence His name is the Prince of Peace. (Isaiah ix. 6.) 

3. Most properly and most fully, the peacemakers shall be 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


202 


ETYMOLOGY OF PERSECUTION. 


called and shall be sons of God and heirs of God in celestial 
glory, which they shall inherit as !he reward of their efforts to 
makepeace. For in heaven all the Saints are, through the beatific 
glory, sons and heirs of God. “These are the peacemakers," 
says S. Leo ( Serm . in Fest. Omn Sane) ; " these who are of one 
mind, who shall be called by an everlasting tide sons of God, 
and co-heirs with Christ, for this shall be the reward which love of 
God and our neighbour shall win, that it shall feel no adversity, 
fear no scandal, but, all the contest of temptation being finished, 
it shall rest in the most tranquil peace of God.” 

Blessed are they which are persecuted, &c. This is the eighth and chief 
Beatitude, subsisting in suffering and patience, whereas the others 
were placed in action. Whence S. Ambrose says, “ He leads thee 
to the end. He brings you up to martyrdom, and there He fixes the 
palm of the Beatitudes.” For it is more difficult to suffer hard 
things than to do difficult things, according to the saying, “To 
act bravely is the part of a Roman, to suffer bravely is the part 
of a Christian.” 

Acutely and subtilly does Nyssen (on the Beatitudes) trace out 
the etymology of persecution, which is a word used of those who 
run and follow, and strive to surpass those who are before them 
in a race. And so Nyssen meditates thus, that a holy man and 
tribulation, or persecution, as it were, are running together, but 
that when he does not give in to persecution, he, a$ the victor, runs 
in front, but persecution follows behind his back, and for that reason 
is called persecution ; because, saith he, their enemies follow the 
righteous, but do not overtake them, for they are overcome by 
the patience and constancy of the righteous. 

For righteousness 9 sake . Because they are just, because they are 
Christians, because they follow after justice, because they keep 
the law of God, or the statutes of their Order, or defend the 
property and rights of the Church, and stand up for the rights of 
orphans, or because they are zealous for the reformation of the 
clergy or their monastery. For righteousness here has a wide 
signification, and embraces every kind of virtue, says S. Chrysostom. 


Digitized by CjOOQle 



USES OF PERSECUTION. 


203 


Although, indeed, some philosophers seem to have suffered and 
been killed for the sake of righteousness, 21s Socrates was put to 
death because he said, “ Many gods ought not to be worshipped 
but one God only;" yet where there is not true faith nor 
charity, there neither is true and perfect righteousness, says S 
Augustine. 

1. Blessed, then, are they who suffer for righteousness' sake, 
because persecution separates us from the world, and unites us to 
God. 2. Because we suffer it for the sake of God. 3. Because 
by this we become like Christ, who all His life long, unto the death 
of the Cross, was persecuted by the Jews. “Let us therefore go 
forth without the camp, bearing his reproach." (Heb. xiii.) The 
Church has always increased in time of persecution, decreased in 
prosperity. So too with all the religious orders. 

For this cause God sends, permits, persecution to come 
upon the faithful, clergy or religious, to cut down the vices which, 
like tares, spring up in a time of peace, and revive the primitive 
vigour of virtue. In this way, under the two Philips, Christian 
Emperors of Rome, the virtue of the faithful languished in peace, 
and Christians gave themselves up to gluttony, avarice, and pride. 
Then God sent the Emperors Decius and Valerian, who sharpened 
the virtue of believers by persecution. This was revealed to S. 
Cyprian, as he himself declares (lib. 4, Epist. 4), “ Ye may know 
that this reproof was given by a vision, that we were sleeping in 
our prayers. This persecution is the trial and examination of our 
sins." And ( Serm . de Laps.), “ A long peace had corrupted the 
discipline delivered unto us : heavenly correction has raised up 
prostrate and all but slumbering faith: there was no devoted 
religion among the clergy, no inward faith in their ministrations, 
no mercy in works, no discipline in morals," Ac. Eusebius 
gives the same reason for the persecution under Diocletian. (Hist. 
lib. 8, c. 1.) 

Wherefore B. Francis Borgia, the third General of the Jesuits, 
was wont to say, there are three things which preserve the 
Society of Jesus: 1. The study of prayer. 2. The union of the 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


204 


CONNECTION OF THE BEATITUDES. 


members among themselves. 3. Persecution. And he gives the 
reasons. Prayer binds us closely to God; concord unites the 
brethren with one another; persecution separates us from the 
world, and compels us to act with prudence, that our persecutors 
may have no handle against us. 

For theirs , &c. He begins the Beatitudes with the kingdom of 
heaven, and He ends them there. He assigns it to the first and 
last Beatitudes, that we may understand that it is implied in the 
intervening six. S. Ambrose, indeed, thinks that the heavenly 
kingdom is a promise to the poor in spirit, quoad the soul, which 
presently migrates from death to heaven ; but to those who suffer 
persecution, quoad the body, which shall be endowed with eternal 
glory in heaven after the Resurrection. Beautifully and ac- 
curately does S. Augustine ( Ps . 94) make God speak thus, “ I 
have something for sale." “What, O Lord? " “The kingdom 
of heaven." “ How is it to be purchased ? " “ The kingdom by 

poverty, joy by sorrow, rest by labour, glory by vileness, life by 
death." 

Note, I. That these eight Beatitudes are all connected among 
themselves. Nor, indeed, is any one blessed who has the first, 
unless he has the other seven likewise. That I may say all in a 
word, it is, Blessed are they who despise the good things of this 
world through poverty of spirit, and its honours through meek- 
ness, and its pleasures through mourning, who moreover follow 
hard after justice and mercy, and come to purity of heart ; those 
also who labour to make others have peace with God and among 
themselves, and finally who, because of these and other works of 
righteousness, suffer persecution, for this is the apex of Christian 
perfection and blessedness. 

Again, the first Beatitude disposes to and becomes a step to the 
second, the second to the third, and so on, as S. Ambrose, Leo, 
and others teach. For poverty of spirit or humility disposes to 
meekness, for the humble are meek ; meekness disposes to mourn- 
ing, for the meek soon perceive their own and others' afflictions. 
Grief or compunction disposes to hungering and thirsting after 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



THE PROPHETS PERSECUTED* 


205 


righteousness. Thirsting after righteousness disposes to mercy, for 
he who desires to increase in righteousness and holiness does 
works of mercy. Mercy disposes to purity of heart, because 
almsdeeds quench sin as water does fire, and increase the charity 
which loves God alone with a pure heart. Purity of heart 
disposes us both to be at peace with ourselves, and to promote 
peace among others, since strifes and wars arise from a heart 
which is impure and full of covetousness. Lastly, those who 
promote peace and the other virtues spoken ofj fall under the 
hatred of many who are depraved and covetous, and are perse- 
cuted by them, which persecution they nobly endure, and so 
perfect the crown of these eight Beatitudes, and crown themselves 
with it 

Observe, lastly, how S. Augustine (lib. I de Serm. Dom. in 
Mont.) beautifully compares the seven Beatitudes to the seven 
gifts of the Spirit. The fear of God is consonant to the humble, 
piety to the meek, wisdom to mourners, strength to the hungry 
and thirsty, counsel to the merciful, understanding to the pure in 
heart, wisdom to the peacemaker. 

Blessed are ye when men shall revile (Gr. hviiKvoxn) you , &c. 
Because, i.e., ye follow My faith, My morals, My life* Falsely 
(Syr. in a lie), because, forsooth, they falsely accuse you as disturbers 
of the public, innovators, superstitious for making a God of a 
crucified man, and worshipping Him. This, therefore, is the 
summit of beatitude, to suffer patiently and generously — yea, 
joyfully — all wrongs and injuries for the sake of Christ, for piety 
and virtue’s sake. 

Rejoice, and he exceeding glad \ &c. Rejoice in calumnies, in false 
accusations, in persecutions, for, I. By them ye are blessed. 2. 
Because there awaits you an ample reward in heaven. 3. Because 
ye are like the prophets, such as Isaiah, who, on account of his 
prophecies, was sawn asunder by Manasseh with a saw ; Jeremiah, 
who was stoned by the Jews to death ; and the rest of the prophets, 
who were almost all put to death in one way or another. He 
animates His own disciples by the example of the prophets, 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



206 


S. IGNATIUS OF ANTIOCH. 


because by sharing’ their lot in suffering persecution they were 
about to become sharers in their society and glory. By this 
Christ tacitly intimates that they succeeded to the place of the 
prophets, yea, were superior to them, because they were called 
to loftier things, to preach, not the Law, but the Gospel, not only 
to the Jews, but to the whole world. Wherefore He subjoins, 
Ye are the salt of the earth , &c. 

Observe here, as against modern heretics, the word reward 
(Gr. fucrOos, hire, wages, Lat. merces) from whence we collect the 
merit of good works. For the merit is merit of reward, and the 
reward is the reward of merit. 

Listen to S. Cyprian (lib. 4, Epist. 6) : “ The Lord hath willed 
us to rejoice and exult in persecution, because when the persecutions 
are accomplished, then are given the crowns of faith, then the 
soldiers of God are approved, then the heavens are opened to the 
martyrs." 

Thus did S. Ignatius, Bishop of Antioch, exult, when sent to 
Rome. Bravely and with alacrity he entered the amphitheatre, 
and looking round upon the vast multitude of at least a hundred 
thousand people, he saluted them in a friendly manner, and said, 
“ Do not think, O ye Romans, that I am here condemned to the 
wild beasts on account of any evil deed, for I have committed 
none, but because I desire to be united to Christ, for whom I 
insatiably thirst." And when he heard the lions roaring he 
said, “ I am the corn of Christ, let me be ground by the teeth of the 
beasts, that I may be found pure tread." Read his Epistle to the 
Romans, in which he begs, and as it were conjures, them, not to 
hinder his martyrdom nor take away his crown from him. “ I 
wish to enjoy the beasts which are prepared for me. It they will 
not come to me I will use force. Now I begin to be a disciple 
of Christ." 

This is the thought which S. James proposes to be as it were 
the theme of his Epistle : “ My brethren, count it all joy when ye 
fall into divers temptations;" where I have said a good deal upon 
tli is subject. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


SALT — ITS USES. 


907 


Ye are the salt , &c. That is, you, O ye Apostles, who are 
sitting here next to Me, to whom I have spoken primarily the 
eight Beatitudes — -ye are, by My election and appointment (for I 
have chosen and appointed you unto this) the salt of the earth , i.e., 
ye ought to be, and by My grace ye shall be. Christ passes 
from the Beatitudes to salt, because He delivers His moral teach- 
ing after the manner of the ancients, by short, separate maxims, 
and because the connection here may be easily traced. You, O 
Apostles, whom I choose to be, after My example, humble, meek, 
4c., shall, in so being, be the salt of the world. 

You ask why does Christ call His Apostles the salt of the earth 
rather than the gold, or silver, or precious stones ? I answer, 
because salt is a thing universally necessary and useful. Salt is 
as it were the balsam of nature, which preserves and seasons 
almost all things with which it is mixed, and keeps them from 
corruption. Thus the Apostles were the salt, t\e., the balsam of 
the earth. 

2. Salt denotes the office, power, and dignity of the Apostles. 
For salt is the symbol of wisdom. For as salt seasons food and 
makes it savoury, so does wisdom season the mind and make it 
wise. Thus in Latin a foolish man is called a man without salt 
(insulsus) or unsalted, according to the verse of Catullus — 

4t tfot one grain of salt in so big a body.” 

The Apostles therefore were salt because they corrected the 
unsavoury morals of the world, and made them wise and savoury. 

3. Salt, says Pliny (lib. 31, c. 10), contains two elements, of an 
•gneous and watery nature — igneous because it is sharp, like 
fire, and if it be cast into fire it makes it flare up ; and if salt be 
:ast into water it is dissolved in it. The same Pliny adds (c. 9) 
that there is nothing more beneficial to the body than salt. The 
Aposdes therefore were the salt of the earth, because by their 
igneous force they kindled it with the love of God, and by their 
aqueous flow of words and their wisdom they watered its dryness 
as with a spiritual dew, and made it fruitful, that it should bring 
forth the fruit of good works and all virtues. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



208 


THE APOSTLES ARE SALT. 


4. Salt flavours insipid food, and by its pungency renders it 
pleasant and wholesome. Thus the Apostles have emended the 
insipid and foolish opinions, mistakes, and customs of men by 
their forcible language, and made them pleasing to God and the 
angels. 

5. As salt penetrates flesh, and preserves it from corruption by 
drying up the humours by which flesh is corrupted, so have the 
Apostles taken away from the minds of men the corruption of 
fleshly concupiscences, and preserved them for the immortality of 
everlasting incorruption. So Cicero (lib. 2 de Nat. Deoruni ) says, 
“ What hath a sow besides its flesh ? Chrysippus says that a 
soul hath been given it for salt, lest it should corrupt.” Thus to 
men who, like sows, were wallowing in flesh and blood, God hath 
given the Apostles, as it were salt and a soul, which might 
spiritually animate them, lest they should putrefy. 

6. Salt excites thirst. So the Apostles have excited a thirst for 
heavenly things. Hear S. Hilary : “ The Apostles are the 
preachers of heavenly things and, as it were, sowers of eternity : 
they bring immortality to all upon whom their speech is sprinkled.” 
Or Euthymius : “ Ye have been chosen by Me to cure all the 
putridity of the world : ye are the salt of the earth.” 

7. Salt, by its pungency, bites and pricks, dries and bums. 
Listen to Pliny (lib. 31, c. 7) : “The nature of salt is igneous, and 
yet an enemy to fire. Putting it to flight, it dries substances and 
binds them together. But salt has such power over dead and 
putrescent substances that by its means they will endure for ages.” 
Thus, too, the Apostles, by their sharp and fiery speech, and by 
their life, have bitten, pricked, dried up, and shaken off the vices 
of men. Hear S. Gregory (Ham. 17) : “If we are salt, we ought 
to season the minds of the faithful. As is among brute beasts a 
rock of salt, so ought to be a priest among the people, that who- 
soever is joined to a priest, he may be seasoned, as if from a rock 
of salt, with the seasoning of eternal life.” Let priests read that 
entire homily of S. Gregory's, and they will find it a golden 
mirror for their life, that they may be the salt of the earth. 

/ 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



HERETICS LIKE NOISOME INSECTS. 


209 


Wisely saith S. Chrysostom, “ Do you wish to know if the people 
of any place are righteous ? Look what sort of a pastor they 
have. If you find him pious, just, sound, believe the people will 
be the same, for they are seasoned with the salt of his wisdom/' 

But if the salt have lost his savour ; &c. If an apostle, if a bishop, 
if a priest — who ought, like salt, to season the morals of others — 
shall, through gluttony, uncleanness, fear, or flattery, lose the 
vigour of his spiritual salt, who shall restore it to him ? No one. 
This may be seen in the case of some of the priests and pastors of 
the past age, who either led scandalous lives, or else were ignorant 
and negligent in instructing the people wandering in, or verging 
upon, heresy. Whence the ecclesiastical order came into sad 
contempt, whence the heresies of Luther, Calvin, and the rest 
sprung up, who, says Maldonatus, are like unto unsavoury bugs : 
when they are alive they bite, when dead they give out an offensive 
smell. 

Trodden underfoot , Ac. “ For it is not he who suffers persecu- 
tion," says S. Augustine, “ who is trodden under foot of men, but 
he who is so foolish as to fear persecution. For only an inferior 
can be trodden down ; but an inferior he cannot be whose heart 
is fixed in heaven, although his body may suffer many things upon 
earth." 

Although salt be of an igneous nature, yet it dissolves if it be 
mingled with water. A good religious priest too is dissolved and 
becomes effeminate, if he associate too much with women, even 
pious ones. Hear what the Elder, cited by John Moschus, says 
in his Spiritual Meadow , c. 2 1 7 : “ My little children, salt is of water; 
and if it approach water, forthwith it fails and is dissolved. A 
monk suffers the same from a woman ; and if he approach a 
woman, he too is dissolved, and comes to such a pass that he is 
no more a monk." 

So too does a priest come to naught if he be too accommo- 
dating to people of the world. Let him remember that he ought 
to be salt, and preserve his vigour, gravity, and liberty in re- 
buking vices. Let him not be ashamed to profess openly that he 

P 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


210 


THE LIGHT OF EXAMPLE. 


is an ecclesiastic and a religious, that is, a worshipper of God, a 
spiritual person, a* despiser of the world, a lover of heavenly 
things. “ Let him enter with another man’s, let him go out with 
his own,” says our S. Ignatius. That is, in the beginning, 
let him accommodate himself to the disposition and speech of 
seculars, but afterwards let him dexterously bring them round to 
spiritual things, to change of character, to sanctity of life. Thus 
shall he be as the salt of the world. 

Ye are the light of the world . Ye are ; again this means, ye are by 
My election and commission what jv ought to be in actual truth. 
The light of the world, that ye may by the light of your doctrine 
and evangelical life illuminate the world obscured by the 
darkness of errors and sins. So S. Hilary. 

S. Chrysostom {Hon i. io in Epist . I ad Timothy says, “ For this 
purpose hath He chosen us, that we should be as lights, and act 
as leaven, that as angels we should be conversant with men on 
earth, that we should act as men with boys, as spiritual with those 
who are carnal.’ * The sun is in heaven, but from thence it dis- 
perses its rays upon the earth ; so do thou be with thy mind in 
heaven, whilst thy body is on earth, that thou mayest by thy con- 
versation, and the example of thy virtue, illuminate, warm, and 
kindle it ; so shalt thou be a light and a sun to the world. 

S. Chrysostom adds something to be pondered deeply: “As- 
suredly, there would be no heathen, if we Christians took care to 
be what we ought to be; if we obeyed God's precepts, if we bore 
injuries without retaliation, if when cursed we blessed, if we ren- 
dered good for evil. For no man is so savage a wild beast, that he 
would not run forthwith to the worship of the true religion, if he saw 
all Christians acting as I have said. And that you may learn that 
it is so, consider how many one Paul drew to the knowledge of 
God. If we were all like him, how many worlds might we 
not be able to win ? ” 

A city set man hill , Ac. Christ here compares His Apostles, i. 
To salt. 2. To light 3. To a city conspicuous on a mountain. 
The Church, that is to say, the prelates of the Church, are often 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


APOSTLES AND PRELATES. 


21 1 


compared in the Psalms to the same thing, as Ps. xlvi. and xlviii. 
and lxxxvii ; also Is. lx., lxv., and Ezek. xl. As, therefore, a 
city upon a mountain cannot be hid, but strikes the eyes of all 
beholders, so do apostles, prelates, and priests come before the 
eyes of all men, that if they discharge their office rightly, and 
preach the gospel more by their lives than by their words, they 
will attract many to Christ, and have praise of all : but if they do 
otherwise, they will turn many away from the Saviour and be 
blamed by all. 

Neither do men light a candle , &c. A candle is not wont to be hid 
under a bushel, i.e., under a vessel , as the Syriac, the Hebrew, and 
S. Luke have it, of measurement, but it is placed on high on a can- 
dlestick. So be ye, O ye Apostles! who are placed on a higher 
step of office and dignity, that ye may enlighten all by your 
preaching and sanctity. 

Allegorically. SS. Hilary, Ambrose, and Bede say, that it is here 
meant that the light of the Gospel was not to be shut up within the 
narrow confines of Judaea, but to be placed upon the height of 
Rome, that it might illuminate all the subject nations. 

Candle , Gr. Xvyyw, i.e., lamp, torch, candle, anything which 
gives light ; for torches and candles are properly placed upon 
stands, and in Italy, lamps upon lamp-stands. So also the 
Hebrew Td!> lappid, which we translate, lamp or lantern, 
signifies anything which gives a light of flame. Hence lamps and 
torches, as here and elsewhere in Scripture, signify holy, and 
especially Apostolic men, who illuminate others by the light of 
their doctrine and holiness, and who inflame them by the fire of 
their charity. Whence Christ says of John the Baptist, “ He 
was a burning and shining lamp." (Vulg.) So Enoch and Elias 
are called two olive-trees, and two candelabra. (Apoc. xi. 4.) 

Let your light, Ac. That they may see, &c. The particle that 
denotes that the Apostles of Christ and all their followers must be 
careful to shine both in word and example, not for themselves but 
for God, in order that they may draw men to God ; and by con- 
sidering this we may reconcile what is here said with Christ's 

p 2 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


MEANING OF AMEN. 


212 

teaching in chap. vi. I, 2, and 5. “Take heed that ye do not 
your righteousness before men, that ye may be seen of them ' 9 The 
emphasis is upon these last words, that the Apostles should not 
do righteous works with any such end in view as being glorified 
and praised by men ; but here Christ commends the doing of good 
works before men, so this only end be kept in view, that they may 
glorify Gcd by them. Hear S. Gregory (3 p. Pastor. Admonit. 
36) : “ Why then is it commanded that our work shall be so done 
as not to be seen, and yet that it shall be seen, but that what we 
do must be hidden, so that we ourselves be not praised, and yet 
must be made manifest that we may increase the glory of our 
Heavenly Father? For when the Lord forbids our doing our 
righteousness before men, He immediately adds, lest we should be seen 
of them ; and when, on the other hand, he tells us that our good 
works should be seen of men, he forthwith subjoins, that they may 
glorify your Father which is in heaven. Whether, therefore, works 
should be seen, or not seen. He showed must be according to the 
end we have in view." 

Think not that I am come to destroy (Gr. icaraAvcrcu, to dissolve 9 
abolish) the law and the prophets. Christ’s special meaning in this 
place is that He came to fulfil the moral precepts of the Law by 
teaching and expounding them more perfectly, and by substituting 
the sanction of eternal for temporal rewards and punishments, 
and by adding to things of precept evangelical counsels of per- 
fection, as will be plain from what follows. It is also meant that 
Christ supplied the imperfection of the Law of Moses by justifying 
us through faith and the sacraments of the New Law, which He 
instituted, which the Law of Moses could not do. 

Verily I say , &c. Verily , Gr. Amen — i.e., “in truth ; " whence 
Aquila translates the Hebrew amen by werurroficym — ie., faithfully, 
truly , certainly. As S. Jerome says (Epist. ad Sophron .), “ Amen is 
the word not of one who swears, but of one who affirms some- 
thing he is about to say, or confirms something which he has said. 
In the former case it is prefixed, in the latter it is affixed, as it 
were a seal." This may be seen from Deut. xxvii. 26, See., and 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


THE VALENTINIANS. 


2IJ 

1 Cor. xiv. 16. Wherefore the LXX translate the word by ycvoiro, 
may it be done . In this place Amen has the meaning of affirming 
and gravely asserting. 

Moreover, Christ Himself is called Amen , Apoc. iii. 14: “Thus 
saith the Amen, the Faithful Witness." 

Until heaven pass away . Not by nature and the perishing of 
nature, but by the mutation of its condition — that is, until heaven 
be changed from this state of corruption to a new and glorious 
state at the Resurrection. In other words, before the end of the 
world, when heaven and earth shall pass away, i.e ., shall be 
renewed, it is necessary that all things which are written of Me 
in the Law be fulfilled. Or, rather, until heaven pass away means 
until it wholly perish. The sentence is a hypothetical one, and 
means, sooner may heaven be destroyed, sooner the earth be riven 
in twain, sooner the universe come to an end, than the minutest 
point of the Law not be fulfilled, either in this life or in the life to 
come. So long, therefore, as heaven and earth shall stand, so 
long the whole Law shall stand. Heaven and earth shall endure 
for ever, much more shall the whole Law endure eternally, accord- 
ing to these words of Christ, “Heaven and earth shall pass 
away, but my words shall not pass away." Whence the Greek is 
in the past tense, ho? fo mp&Jhi, meaning, the whole frame of the 
universe shall perish sooner than the Law of God. 

Hear S. Irenaeus : “ Now, of the name *I?^rov$, Jesus , the letters 
iota and eta, i and e, make up the number 18. These, say the 
Valentinians, are the eighteen i£ons; and this is why the 
Saviour said, one jot or one tittle , &c." 

A similar phrase is used in a similar sense (Ps. lxxii. 7) : “ In 
his days justice shall arise, and abundance of peace until the moon 
Le taken away;" also Ps. lxxxix. 37, meaning, “The sun and 
moon shall endure for ever, much more shall the throne of Christ 
remain eternally." 

One jot . Christ, speaking to Hebrews, said, one yod, as the 
Syriac has. For the Greek translator substituted the equivalent, 
iota . Yod in Hebrew, like iota in Greek and / in Latin, is the 


Digitized by CjOOQle 


214 


PHARISAIC PERVERSION. 


smallest letter in the alphabet. From the letter yod, although the 
least, Valentinus, as S. Irenaeus testifies, constructed the greatest 
heresy — viz., that of his JEons, in truth portents of names, rather 
than names of real existences. 

Or one titile (Vulg. apex) of the law . He calls the apices of the 
law, not the Hebrew points and accents, which were not invented 
by the Rabbin until long after the time of Christ, but the tops or 
little extremities of the letters in which the Law was written. 

Till all be fulfilled . All things, that is, which have been spoken 
concerning Me and My acts, My Church and Sacraments in the 
Law and the Prophets. Again, all things mean all which have 
been commanded, or promised, or threatened. 

Whosoever therefore shall break, &c. Of these least commandments 
— viz., which the Law just spoken of commands, or in respect of 
which I am about to explain and perfect the Law. This is why 
He subjoins, I say unto you that unless your righteousness, &c. It does 
not mean, then, that all the commandments of the Law are very 
small ; but that he should be condemned who should break one of 
even its smallest precepts, or, like the Pharisees, pervert them by 
a false interpretation, as by teaching, for example, that only out- 
ward adultery, not inward concupiscence, was forbidden by the 
Law. We must observe in this place that commandment is to be 
taken strictly for a weighty precept binding under the penalty of 
mortal sin, like the Ten Commandments. For he who shall break 
one such commandment, although the least in the Decalogue, shall 
surely be condemned. For it is entirely probable that certain 
trifling things in the Old Law, although they were commanded by 
God Himself, bind only under venial sin and temporal punish- 
ment. Such, I mean, as taking a bird together with her young 
ones in the nest, seething a kid in its mother’s milk, &c. Not such 
as these are here called least commandments , but those which are 
least amongst the great commandments, such as to look upon a 
woman to lust after her, which the Pharisees considered a very 
small thing, and scarcely a sin at all. 

Shall be called the least. Shall be accounted the least ; shall be 


Digitized by ejOOQle 



RIGHT WAT TO TKACH. 


215 


looked upon as vile ; shall be had in contempt by God and the 
holy angels* as the last of men, and altogether unworthy to be 
admitted into the kingdom of heaven, but to be damned and cast 
into hell. Wherefore S. Chrysostom and Theophylact interpret 
least to mean not at all , because in heaven there are none who are 
not great, as S. Augustine says, “ all kings of heaven, sons of God." 

In the kingdom of heaven. Strictly so called, say S. Chrysostom 
and Theophylact. But S. Augustine and others interpret the 
kingdom of heaven here to mean the Church. 

But whosoever shall do and teach, &c. Great, viz., a doctor, father, 
and prince of the disciples whom he has taught. And all the 
commandments of the Law are reckoned as having been done, 
when whatsoever has not been done is pardoned by God, says S. 
Augustine. For a fault is corrected and compensated for by 
penitence. As S. Bernard says (Tr. de dispensat. et prcecept .), “A 
part of rule is regular correction." When, therefore, the guilty 
fine undergoes this, he fulfils the rule. 

Moraliter . Learn from hence the right way and method of 
teaching, that a doctor should first do what he is about to teach. 
Christ, says S. Luke, began to do and to teach. He was first Himself 
poor, humble, meek, a mourner, and then He taught, “ Blessed 
are the poor in spirit." Let a doctor therefore examine his 
conscience before God before he teach, whether he be poor in 
spirit, meek, and so on ; let him see whether he cleave to the 
world or to Christ, for that he may be Christ's he ought to break 
his pledge of friendship with the world, and be able to say with 
5 . Paul, “If I yet pleased men I should not be the servant of 
Christ." 

For I say unto you that except your righteousness shall exceed \ <fcc., i.e., 
be more abundant, excellent, full, and perfect. Your righteousness, 
i>., your observance of the Law . For it fulfils that which the Law 
declares to be just or righteous. It also makes us really just 
before God. As the Apostle says, “ Not the hearers of the law 
are just before God, but the doers of the law shall be justified." 
(Rom. ii. 13.) 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


216 


WHEN ANGER IS SINFUL. 


Ye have heard that it was said ', fa., commanded . Ye have heard, fa ^ 
from the Scribes, teaching 1 and expounding the Law of Moses, 
Christ here begins to show in detail that He was not dissolving 
the Law, but fulfilling it, and that Christian righteousness ought to 
excel Judaic and Pharisaic righteousness. Christ therefore here 
proposes and prefers Himself and His own doctrine both to the 
Scribes and Pharisees, who by their Scvrcpwreig, or traditions, 
perversely interpreted the Law, as is plain from verses 20 and 43, 
and to the Law of Moses itself. For Christ added to the Law 
precepts of explicit belief concerning God the Three in One, and 
concerning Christ's Incarnation, Passion, and Redemption. He 
moreover supplied the defects and imperfections of the Old Law, 
for the Law of Moses was given to the comparatively uninstructed 
Jews, and this Law Christ perfected by His Evangelical Law. 

Thou shalt not kill. Many thought that by this law murder only 
was forbidden, but Christ here teaches that by it even all angry 
words, blows, reproaches, are forbidden, for such things are, as 
it were, preludes leading by a direct road to homicide. 

But I say unto you, Ac. . Christ here explains and fulfils the 
commandment, Thou shalt not kill, and teaches that even inward 
anger is forbidden by it. I say unto you . I decree, assert, and 
sanction, I who am Legislator of all law, Evangelical, Mosaic, and 
natural. 

Whosoever is angry . The Greek adds cLd}, rashly, without cause . 
But the Roman Codices, S. Jerome, and S. Augustine (lib. 1, 
Retract ., c. 19) omit it. But those or similar words must be under- 
stood. For unlawful anger is what is here treated of; since anger 
for a just cause, as for example against sin and sinners, is both 
lawful and praiseworthy. Anger has been for this very purpose 
implanted in man’s nature, that it should make them brave against 
vice, and against those things which are really their enemies. 

Observe, anger is the thirst for vengeance, and is itself a mortal 
sin if it deliberately contrive, or wish for, any serious evil of body, 
or goods, or reputation of one’s neighbour, or rejoice in such evils, 
even though he deserve them, for he who is angry rejoices in 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


WHEN ANGER IS LAWFUL. 


217 


them not as fruits of justice but of revenge. But anger is a 
venial sin if it desire some trifling calamity to one's neighbour, 
even though the anger be violent, and flame out both internally 
and externally. Lastly, anger is no sin at all if it be assumed from 
zeal for righteousness, for the extirpation of sin and sinners. Such 
was the anger ofMattathias when he slew the legate of Antiochus, 
who was forcing the Jews to sacrifice to idols. ( 1 Mac. ii. 25.) 
Such was the anger of Christ when He drove the buyers and 
sellers out of the Temple. 

Hear S. Chrysostom on the words in Ps. iv., Be ye angry and 
sin not : “ We may be angry lawfully, for Paul was angry with 
Elymas, and Peter with Sapphira. But I should not call this anger 
without qualification. I should call it philosophy, carefulness. 
The father is angry with his child, but it is because he cares for 
him. It is he who avenges himself who is rashly angry, but he 
who corrects the faults of others is of all men the meekest For 
even God is angry, not to revenge Himself, but to correct us. 
Let us therefore imitate Him. Thus to act is divine, otherwise 
it is human anger." Hear also S. Gregory (on Job v. 2, Anger 
slayeth the foolish man ) : "There is an anger which springs from 
zeal for righteousness. This is the anger which, because Eli had 
it not, he roused against himself the vengeance of thj wrath 
of God. For the sword of the eternal Ruler flames against 
him who is lukewarm in correcting the vices of those who are 
placed under him." 

Shall be in danger of the judgment . Judgment here is to be taken 
in a somewhat different sense from that in which it occurs just 
above, Whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment . For there 
the human tribunal by which men were condemned to death for 
murder is meant ; but here is understood the Divine Judgment, 
which judges and condemns venial anger to temporal punishment, 
such as purgatory, but deadly anger to eternal punishment, i>., 
to hell. 

How vile a thing anger is ! See S. Basil and S. Chrysostom 
{Horn, on Anger) ; Cicero (4 Tuscul.), where, among other things. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



218 


RACA. 


he says, “Is there anything more like to madness than anger — 
anger which Ennius well calls the beginning of madness? The 
colour, voice, glare of the eye, impotence ot words and deeds, 
what have they to do with sanity ? What is more shameful 
than Homer’s Achilles — than Agamemnon quarrelling? Anger 
brought Ajax to madness and death.” 

But whoso shall say to his brother \ &c. Baca. i. S. Chrysostom 
thinks raca here signifies thou , as if any one should say con temp* 
tuously to his neighbour, Go thou about thy business , what wouldest 
thou ? — to address any one as thou out of disrespect. 

2. Theophylact says raca means one worthy of being spat 
upon, for pn rok means spittle; but this would be a worse form of 
reproach than to call any one a fool, which Christ here places as 
the worst reproach. 

3. Some think raca here is the Greek fiaicos, ragged. 

4. And more probably, S. Augustine, Rupert, Anselm, and 
others think raca is an interjection of despising and opposing, and 
that by it are denoted all the tokens of an evil-disposed mind, 
whether murmuring, shouting, or spitting, or wrinkling the brow, 
and so on. 

5. And last, S. Jerome, Angelus Caninius, and others think 
that raca is a Hebrew word, derived from pn ric , i>., “ empty,” 
though not in brain, as S. Jerome says, for that would be a fool ; 
but empty in purse ; so that raca would mean a man of straw , a 
pauper . So the Vulgate translates Judg. xi. 3. 

Lastly, George Michaelis, the Maronite (in Procemio Gramma - 
ticce Syriacoe, c. de prastantia Syr. Lingua ) says raca is Syriac, and 
has three meanings — 1. A tortoise, which animal is considered so 
deformed by the Syrians that they nauseate and abhor it ; so 
too, the Italians, when they would speak of a man slow and 
deformed, say, pare iartaruga , like a tortoise. 2. Baca, from rac, 
“ he has spit.” For the Syrians, when they would burn any one up 
with ignominy, call him raco, u spat upon ; * or raca is the 
same as rauco , i.e., “ spittle ; ” for a Syrian, to show that he made 
no account of a person, would say, M Thou art but as spittle to 


Digitized by ^ooQle. 



JEWISH TRIBUNALS. 


219 


me.” 3. Raca with the Syrians means one despised ’ vile , abject , 
dirty ; and this is the sense in which I think the word raca is here 
used by Christ Thus far Georgius. 

It is certain that raca is more than to be angry, less than to say, 
Thou fool / Again, raca is ambiguous. It may be venial, or it 
may be mortal ; but to say, Thou fool , is certainly a mortal sin. 

In danger of the council . Gr. owcSpup, from which word the 

Jews called their highest tribunal the “ Sanhedrim.” As though 
Christ had said, “ He shall be obnoxious to the judgment of the 
highest court, the Sanhedrim.” 

Observe, the Talmudic Doctors, and from them Franc. Lucas* 
Maldonatus, and others, say that the Hebrews had three courts : 
The first din mammona , which was a court for the trial of money 
causes; it was a court presided over by three judges. The 
second court was din mishpat , or the Court of Judgment , i.e., for 
capital offenees. By this tribunal cases of murder were examined 
and decided. This court consisted of twenty-three judges. The 
third was the Sanhedrim , which consisted of seventy- two judges, by 
which grave causes and crimes were tried, such as heresy, false 
prophets, idolatry, apostacy, &c. Christ, omitting the first, 
alludes here to the two latter tribunals, and calls the second the 
judgment, the third owe&pvw, the Sanhedrim, the council. The 
meaning is, that the proportion between anger and a reproachful 
word, and between the punishment of both, was the same as 
between the judgment of Mishpat and the Sanhedrim , or the highest 
tribunal — that as the latter excelled the former, so the penalty of 
an opprobrious word exceeded the penalty of anger. For in this 
comparison, as is usual, it is not necessary to make everything 
apply. There is, then, a catachresis in the words judgment and 
council . For by judgment is signified the lesser fault of anger, and 
consequently the lesser condemnation and penalty ; and by 
council the greater fault and the severer punishment. 

The meaning then is, as a murderer under the Old Law was in 
danger of the judgment — namely, that his cause should be tried by 
the criminal judges, and he himself condemned to death ; so in 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


220 


DISTINCTION BETWEEN HELL AND PURGATORY. 


like manner anger, which is the first step to murder, is a criminal 
cause, and consequently pertains not to the lowest tribunal of 
Mammona , but of Judgment , not human but Divine ; so that if it 
should be intense and voluntary, that is, with a deliberate inten- 
tion of inflicting death or grave evil upon his neighbour, he should 
for this be condemned to death, not temporal but eternal. 

But if anger should break forth into a rough word, such as 
raca, a man would sin grievously — grievously I say, because he 
would manifest anger by an outward sign, which would pertain 
to the tribunal of the Sanhedrim, to be heavily punished, according 
to the degree of the fault. But if he should say, Thou fool , it would 
not be a case for the Judgment , but would render him liable to the 
damnation of hell. 

From this explanation it appears, in opposition to the Stoics 
and Jovinian, that there are degrees of faults and punishments, 
that some sins are worse than others, and so deserve a severer 
punishment from God. Whence there is sin which is venial, and 
there is sin which is mortal. Consequently, in opposition to 
Calvin, there is clearly a distinction between hell and purga- 
tory. 

Bui whosoever shall say, Thou fool, &c. Under this word fool, we 
are to understand all kinds of revilings, calumnies, reproaches, 
curses, which are mortal sins, if they be uttered grievously to dis- 
honour our neighbour, or if the desire to do him injury and 
revile him, spring from the heart. For the gravity or triviality of 
a contumelious word must be weighed by the intention of the 
speaker. If you say it in joke, or not really to dishonour, but to 
correct, it is not formal, but material contumely, says D. Thom. 
(2, 2. q. 72, art . 2). Hence parents may severely correct and 
reprove and rebuke their children, and masters their servants, if 
it be done with moderation, and for just correction. Thus Christ 
calls Peter Satan (Matt. xvi. 23), and Paul calls the Galatians 
44 foolish ” (Gal. iii. 1). Again, the gravity of the contumely must 
be measured by the dignity of the person spoken to. For to say 
to a grave and honourable man, 44 Thou fool,” is a grave con- 


Digitized by ^ooQle 



SATISFACTION MUST BE MADE. 


221 


tumely ; but to call a man a fool who really is one, is a compara- 
tively light reproach. 

Of hell fire . The Arabic has, the fire of hell . S. Jerome observes 
that Christ here first uses the word Gehenna for hell. It is no- 
where in the Old Testament used in that sense. Gehenna is 
derived from ge, a valley, and Hinnom or Ennon , a Jew so called. 
Gehenna is the valley of Hinnom. It was a pleasant vale near 
Jerusalem, in which parents were accustomed to burn their 
children in sacrifice to Moloch ; and they beat drums that their 
cries and wails might not be heard. Hence the same place was 
called Tophet, i.e., “a drum." Wherefore, Christ here speaks of the 
Gehenna of fire , to show that nothing but fire, and that eternal fire, 
is meant. See Isaiah xxx. 33, where Gehenna and its torments are 
graphically depicted : For Tophet is ordained of old, Ac. 

Ver. 23. — Therefore , if thou bring thy gift, Ac. If thy brother 
have anything to complain of in thee, any wrong for which to 
expostulate with thee, as that thou hast called him raca, or fool . 
This is the force of therefore in this passage. It would appear that 
the Scribes taught that all sins, and especially violations of the 
Sixth Commandment, were expiated by sacrifices and offerings at 
the altar of God, even when no satisfaction was made for a wrong 
done to one’s neighbour. But Christ teaches the contrary, and 
sanctions the law of justice and charity, by which He bids that 
satisfaction must first be made to our neighbour who has been 
injured by us either in word or deed. Wherefore he subjoins, 

Leave there thy gift , Ac. This is a precept, both of law and of 
natural religion, which has been by Christ in this place most 
strictly sanctioned, both because by the Incarnation of Himself 
He has, in the very closest manner, united us all to Himself and 
to one another. This greater union, which we have therefore 
through Christ, demands greater love and unity among Christian 
brethren : so He has said, “ A new commandment give I unto 
you, that ye love one another.” Furthermore, the sacrifice of the 
Eucharist is more holy than the ancient sacrifices. It is the 
gathering together and the communion of the Body, of which we 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



222 


WHO IS OUR ADVERSARY? 


all partake ; and therefore we are all mutually united to Christ 
and one another. Hence it is called communion, that is, the 
common union of all. Since therefore the Eucharist is a sacrifice, 
as well as a Sacrament and profession of mutual love and peace, 
it is necessary that all discord should be done away, and that 
those who have offended should reconcile themselves to those 
whom they have offended before this holy Synaxis, lest they be 
found liars. For in truth he is a liar who takes the Sacrament of 
union, that is, the Eucharist, and is not in union with, but bears a 
grudge or rancour against, his neighbour. 

This is why it used to be the custom at Mass, that before Holy 
Communion, Christians were wont to give one another a holy 
kiss, as a symbol of reconciliation and union, in place of which 
what is called the Pax is now bestowed, 

S. John the Almoner, Patriarch of Alexandria, to fulfil literally 
this precept or counsel of Christ, was once standing at the altar 
to say Mass, when he remembered that a certain cleric had con- 
ceived a hatred for him, and although he was the offended party, 
yet he asked his pardon first, and being thus reconciled, he went 
with him joyfully to the altar and finished the sacrifice, saying with 
confidence to God, “Forgive us our debts as we forgive our 
debtors," as Leontius records in his Life, He adds that the same 
John repelled Damianus, a deacon, from Communion, and said to 
him, “ Go first and be reconciled to thy brother." Damianus 
promised so to do, when the Patriarch gave him the Sacred 
Mysteries. 

Agree y Gr. tvvowv, i>., be of good will , Syriac, a friend; with thitie 
adversary , Gr. r<5 SarrtZuctp <rov, i>., thine accuser , thy prosecutor, Syriac, 
Beet dinochy “ the master, or lord of thy lawsuit," Arabic, with him 
who is at law with thee : the uttermost farthing , i>., of thy debt 

You will ask, who is this adversary i I. Tertullian (lib. de Animd), 
answers, it is the devil. He is Satan, i>., our adversary. 

2 . S. Athanasius, or whoever be the author of Quasi. S. Script, 
ad Antioch, (quasi. 2 6), thinks the adversary means the flesh : for it 
is an adversary to the soul. “ For the flesh lusteth against the 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



WHAT IS THE PRISON ? 


223 


spirit, and the spirit against the flesh ” (Gal. v. 1 7). But we must 
not agree either with the devil, or the flesh, which is what we are 
here told to do by Christ. 

3. The same Athanasius says with better reason, elsewhere, 
that it is our conscience, for this is our adversary, and stings us 
when we do ill, until we agree with it, by following its dictates. 

4. SS. Augustine, Anselm, and Bede are of opinion that God, 
or the law of God is meant, for these fight against our lusts. 
Wherefore clearly we ought to consent unto them, lest we incur 
the punishments with which they threaten us. But these are 
mystical, or symbolical interpretations. 

Wherefore I say with SS. Jerome, Hilary, and Ambrose, that 
by our adversary is here meant any one who has been unjustly 
offended, or injured by us, and is therefore in a position to be able 
to accuse us before God. With such a one Christ in the preceding 
verse bade us be reconciled. 

Note that there is here a Hebraism, and a parabolical form of 
expression, in which it is not necessary to adapt every word, but 
the general scope and meaning is what must be chiefly considered. 
And these, in this case, are rather hinted at than expressed. 
The sense then is this : — As a debtor, or one who is accused by a 
prosecutor before a judge, acts prudently if he agree with his 
adversary before judgment, and so escape the condemnation of 
the judge, prison, or infamy, so in like manner do thou act ; and 
if thou hast injured thy brother in any way, as for instance by 
calling him raca, or a fool \ thou hast made thyself a debtor, as it 
were, to restore him to honour : come in then, and be reconciled 
with him speedily, before thou be delivered as guilty to God the 
Judge, who by a righteous vengeance shall deliver thee to prison, 
until thou shalt pay all thy debt. That prison is hell, or purga- 
tory, according to the greater or less heinousness of thy sin. The 
word until, seems to bear a reference to purgatory, as though it 
signified terminable punishment, which is purgatory, whereas the 
punishment of hell has no end. 

Farthing • Greek, KoSpayrry. This is a word which has been 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



224 


THE LAST FARTHING. 


borrowed from the Latin, like many others which are found in 
the Evangelists, such as prcetorium, ceniurio , &c. 

The quadrans , here translated farthing , was the fourth part of 
the Roman as, and is put for any very small coin. And the 
spiritual application is, that every debt, even the very least of the 
fault of anger, must be paid and atoned for after this life, in the 
place of justice. Wherefore in this life, where is the place for 
mercy, agreement, and pardon, let us be reconciled to our ad- 
versary — t\e., whomsoever we have injured, either by word or 
deed. I have read in a history that a certain servant who had 
departed this life appeared to his master, who asked him of his 
state and condition. The servant answered, “ I am in that place 
where every debt is exactly and rigidly reckoned, and where not 
so much as a straw is overlooked.” Doctor Jacobus also relates 
that a certain religious man, who had departed this life, appeared 
in vile raiment and with a sad countenance, and said to a com- 
panion, “ No one believes, no one believes, no one believes how 
strictly God judges, and how severely He punishes.” 

Ver. 27 and 28. — Ye have heard \ &c. . . . to lust after her — » 
that is, with the design and object of indulging sinful passion with 
her — hath already committed adultery with her in his heart . Because 
by adultery he hath already corrupted her in his mind, and there- 
fore before God, who beholds the heart, he is an adulterer, and 
as an adulterer he will be punished by Him. 

Christ passes from anger to concupiscence, because these two 
passions have the greatest influence over men. And as He ex- 
plained the commandment, Thou shalt not Ml, to forbid anger, so 
He here explains Thou shalt not commit adulteiy to forbid con- 
cupiscence. For many of the Scribes and Pharisees greatly erred 
in their exposition of this precept, as well as of the former. For 
although they knew that it was commanded by the tenth precept 
of the Decalogue, Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour’s wife, never- 
theless they erred — 1. Because they understood it of concupiscence, 
not altogether internal, but such as is wont to break out in touch, 
kisses, lascivious words, and such like, according to the maxim, 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



FREE-WILL THE CRITERION OF VIRTUE. 


225 


“The law prohibits the hand, not the mind.” But this is true of 
civil and state law, which only punishes external wrongdoing, but 
not of the law of God, which weighs and chastises the inmost 
thoughts of the heart. Josephus, the Jewish historian, fell into this 
very mistake, when, in the twelfth book of his Antiquities, he cites 
Polybius as saying that Antiochus Epiphanes perished miserably 
because he had wished to spoil the temple of Diana. Josephus finds 
fault with Polybius, saying, “ To have wished merely, and not to 
have effected the sacrilege, does not seem a thing worthy of punish- 
ment.” And R. David Kimchi, cited by Gerebrard (Ps. lxvi.), 
says, “ Even if I should see iniquity in my heart, which I was even 
prepared to carry out in act, that it should be in the presence of 
God, and if I should utter it with my lips, yet will not God hear it — 

i.f., it will not be imputed to me for wickedness. For God does 
not reckon an evil thought as a work, unless it be against the faith 
of God and religion.” Thus, too, there are many in this day who 
say, “ To think evil is not a sin, but to do evil.” 

But this is a crass error, known and confuted by Aristotle and 
other heathens. For free will is the proper test and criterion of 
goodness and wickedness, of virtue and vice. For if free will seeks 
what is good and honest, it is itself good and laudable; but if evil, 
it is evil and blameworthy. Wherefore the external act, as, for 
instance, of adultery, is not, speaking precisely, a sin in itself (as 
is plain from the case of idiots being adulterers), unless it proceed 
from free will. For from free will it derives all its formal sin- 
fulness. 

2. The Scribes erred in thinking that immodest looks, touch, 
kisses, &c., were not sins of adultery and fornication, but of concu- 
piscence, and so were done against the Tenth Commandment, 
Thau shall not covet thy neighbour’s wife , but not against the Seventh. 
In opposition to this Christ here teaches the contrary, and so ex- 
pounds the Seventh Commandment that all impurity is forbidden 
by it, because all such things are the road to adultery, and so a 
kind of beginning of adultery. 

3. They were in error who thought that by this commandment 

Q 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


i 



226 


THE EIGHT EYE. 


only concupiscence in respect to another man’s wife, but not of any 
unmarried woman, was forbidden. This error Christ here corrects, 
and teaches that all impurity between the sexes is forbidden by 
this law. 

Vers. 29 and 30. — But if thy right eye , &c. It is plain that there 
are here two parables, taken from the two most excellent and most 
useful of our bodily members — the right eye and the right hand. 
And Christ signifies that everything which entices us to sin must be 
cast away, however dear, precious, and necessary it may be to 
us. He makes mention of the eye first, because he had just before 
said, Whoso looketh upon a woman, &c. 1. Thus, S. Chrysostom 

(Horn. 17), by the right eye and hand, understands a woman 
beloved, such a one as he had just been speaking of, that she 
must be cast off, if by her look, voice, or gesture she provoke to 
lust. 2. S. Augustine {lib. de Serm. Dom. in Mont., lib. 1), under* 
stands any friend and minister, even one who is necessary. 3. S. 
Hilary, Theophylact (in loc.), Cyril, Pacian (Epist. 3), understand 
parents and relations, that intercourse with them must be cut 
off, if it leads us into sin. 4. S. Jerome understands affections and 
ices of the mind. 5. Auctor Imperfecti considers that by the 
right eye and hand the mind and will are meant, which must be 
called away from carnal pleasures. 

But more simply and plainly you may take the right eye and 
hand to be actually meant, but in such a sense as to subserve the 
meaning of the parable, and to be parabolically explained. For 
there is here a continuous parable, in which Christ has regard to 
concupiscence of sight. Christ is dealing with such an implied 
objection as this which follows: “You may urge that if the eye 
and the sight are adulterous when they look upon a woman to lust 
after her, what then shall I do with the eyes which God has given 
me to see with ? ” 

Again, it is a metaphor taken from surgery. As those who 
are sick and injured take care that a surgeon should amputate or 
remove the most noble and useful of our members, if their remain- 
ing imperil the safetyof the whole body ; so, also, I admonish 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


THE RIGHT HAND. 


227 


you, O my faithful people, that ye endure any loss whatsoever, 
rather than commit a sin, especially a deadly sin ; that, indeed, 
whatever is a stumbling-block to you and draws you to sin, 
although it be as dear and necessary to you as your right eye, 
you should altogether pluck it out and cast it from you, at what- 
ever cost to you of pain and inconvenience ; for example, that ye 
should put away the sight of an eye, even if modest in other 
respects, that is, the friendship and society of female relations, a 
wife, a son, a parent, if they bring upon you peril of sin, t\e., if by 
other means you are not able to escape sin, for it is better to 
enter into heaven having one eye, than having two eyes to be cast 
into hell. But because it is always possible to escape from sin in 
some other way than by cutting off a member, it is not lawful to 
cut it off and so mutilate oneself. Thus it was that Origen, who 
made himself a eunuch for the sake of chastity, was condemned by 
the Church. Finally, the concupiscences which have to be cut off 
and mortified by every one so tenaciously cleave to the eyes and 
the body, yea, to the soul itself, that they cannot be rooted out 
without great force and sense of pain, so that they who cut them 
off suffer as much as if they plucked out an eye or a tooth. They 
who have gone through it know what it is. Whence it is called 
mortification, because it produces the feeling and pain of death. 

Thus according to the letter, SS. Aquilinus and Andomarus, as 
is related in their Lives in Surius, who had been blind, and recovered 
their sight by a miracle, asked of God that they might be again 
deprived of sight, that they might be free from the distractions 
and temptations to which sight gives rise. Furthermore it was 
by a special leading of God that the virgin mentioned in the 
Spiritual Meadow of Sophronius, plucked out her eyes and sent 
them to her lover, who persecuted her with his attentions, because 
he was ravished with the- beauty of her eyes. When he received 
this gift the lover was smitten with compunction, and exchanged 
his secular for a monastic life. 

S. Antonius asked Didymus, a blind man, whom S. Jerome calls 
his seer, that is, his teacher, if he grieved over his blindness. He 

Q 2 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



228 


LAW OF DIVORCE. 


was silent or a little while, and nodded; then he said, “A prudent 
man ought not to grieve because he is without eyes, which are 
possessed by flies and bees ; but he ought to rejoice, because he 
has greater opportunities for opening the eyes of his mind, by 
which he may see God and divine things." 

Ver. 31. — It has been said , &c. See what I have written upon 
the giving a bill of divorce in Deut. xxiv. 1. 

Ver. 32. — But I say unto you , &c. Christ here corrects and 
settles the law of divorce. 1. Because the law easily conceded 
divorce for various causes. But Christ permits it only on account 
of fornication, if a wife be an adulteress ; and from an adulterer 
the innocent wife is at liberty to depart, according to that maxim, 
“ If a man break his marriage vow that may be broken with him." 
2. The Law conceded both to the woman who was put away, and 
to the husband who repudiated her, the liberty of contracting a 
second marriage. But Christ denies it to both. 3. The Law 
conceded to the husband alone the power of giving a writing of 
divorcement But Christ, with respect to this matrimonial right 
places the man and the woman upon a perfect equality, as S. 
Paul teaches, I Cor. vii. 4. 

Except for the cause of fornication. By fornication here some 

understand any sin whatever, that is, in the form of a sort of 
spiritual fornication with any creature, leaving God, the Creator 
and Husband of the Soul. Thus S. Augustine, Origen, in loc. 
But this is taking it in too loose a sense. 

By fornication others understand infidelity. For this is constantly 
called fornication by the prophets, that is to say, spiritual and 
mystical fornication. 

But expositors, ancient and modern, passim , understand forni- 
cation here in its strict, literal sense, as denoting all illicit sexual 
intercourse. 

You will say it is lawful to put away a wife if she endeavour to 
draw her husband into any sin, as is laid down in the chapter, 
Qucesivi de divoriiis , and as Christ Himself sufficiently indicates, 
ver. 29. Also if the wife practise sorcery, or compass her 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



DIVORCED PERSONS MAY NOT RE-MARRY. 229 

husband’s death ; so that it is lawful to put a wife away for other 
causes besides fornication. 

I answer, what you say is true, but Christ here assigns fornication 
as the only cause of divorce, both because it is the only proper 
cause of divorce, speaking* in a strict sense, from marriage, as 
being immediately destructive of it, whilst the others are general 
causes, and would absolve a Christian from any union whatever ; 
also because the divorce of even a repentant adulteress is conceded 
in perpetuity, so that although the wife repent of her adultery the 
husband is not bound to receive her again to his house, whereas 
in the other cases he is bound to receive her back again to favour ; 
lastly, because Christ here wishes entirely to exclude all such 
causes of divorce as the wife’s deformity, poverty, disagreeableness, 
&c., which were common among the Jews. And to them He is 
here addressing Himself. 

And whoso shall marry her that is put away committeth adultery . 
Cajetan and others here repeat the words, excepting for the cause of 
fornication, as though it were lawful for the man putting away the 
adulterous wife, and for the adulteress herself, to enter again into 
matrimony. But what S. Paul says (i Cor. vii. u), is plainly 
repugnant to this idea. For he there bids the innocent wife 
remain unmarried, or else be reconciled to her adulterous hus- 
band. See what I have there said; and this is the constant 
usage and interpretation of the Church, of which more on 
chap. xix. 9. 

Ver. 33. — Again, ye have heard, &c. Thou shalt perform, £*., Thou 
shalt pay, shalt fulfil what thou hast sworn unto the Lord, or by 
the Lord that thou wilt do. So S. Chrysostom properly explains 
that by oaths are here meant vows confirmed by an oath, that we 
are bound to render them, that is, perform them unto God. Suarez 
explains differently. “ If thou desirest to swear, swear by the true 
God, not by idols." 

Ver. 34. — But I say unto you, &c. Christ here explains and 
perfects the third precept of the Decalogue, which the Scribes and 
Pharisees had explained falsely. For I. they asserted that an 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


230 


IS IT LAWFUL 


oath became an oath, and was binding, if it were made by God, 
and called Him to witness, but not so if it were sworn by creatures, 
Christ here teaches the contrary. For in creatures the Creator is 
understood, for they were made by God, and all that they have 
and are is from God. For he who swears, calls God, who is the 
prime Verity, to witness his oath. He therefore who swears by 
a creature, either makes that creature a God, which is the sin of 
idolatry, or else it behoves to understand God the Creator in the 
oath. 

2. The Scribes erred, who thought that by this precept perjury 
only was forbidden. On the contrary Christ here teaches that by 
it every oath is forbidden, all irreverence and abuse of the name 
of God. 

But I say unto you, &c. From this passage, the Pelagians, as 
S. Augustine testifies ( Epist . 89, q. 5.) taught that no oath was 
lawful for Christians. The Waldenses thought the same, as we 
see from the Council of Constance, and the Anabaptists of the 
present day hold the same opinion, who will not swear in a trial 
at the bidding of the judge. 

But this is an error of faith, which the perpetual practice of the 
Church, as well as the example of God Himself, of S. Paul, and the 
Saints condemns, as is plain from Ps. cx. 4 ; Rom. i. 9 ; Philip, 
i. 8; 1 Cor. xv. 31, &c. Reason itself shows us the same thing; 
for an oath is an honour to God as the prime Verity, because he 
who swears appeals to Infallible Truth as his witness. Where- 
fore an oath is an act of religion, and the highest worship, so 
that it be done in truth and justice, as Jeremiah says, iv. 2. 

You will ask, Why, then, does Christ say, Swear not at all? 
1. S. Bernard answers (Serm. 65 in Cant.) that this is not of 
precept, but only of counsel. 

2. Others allow that this is a precept, but one which only forbids 
peijury. 

3. Others think that the command, Swear not at all, applies only 
to swearing by creatures, not by God. To this opinion S. Jerome 
inclines. 


Digitized by 


Google 



FOR CHRISTIANS TO SWEAR? 


231 


But all these explanations are forced and incorrect, and are 
refuted by what follows ; for Christ bids us swear not at all , (1) 
because, as S. Augustine says (de Verb . Apostoli ), " False swearing 
is destructive, true swearing is perilous, swearing not at all is 
safe/’ Not at all — i.e., “ As far as lieth in thee, that thou shouldst 
not affect nor love swearing, nor take any pleasure in an oath, as 
though it were a good thing.” Again, to swear is, perse, a moral 
evil of irreverence with respect to God; just as it is a moral evil, 
per se, to kill any one ; yet there are cases in which it is a duty. 
So it is with an oath. In Paradise it was not lawful to swear, 
nor will it be lawful in heaven. So great is the majesty of the 
Name of God that It must not be called to witness unless necessity 
compel. For to invoke It about small and worthless things is to 
make It small and vile, just as would be the action of one who 
should call the king as witness about a single guinea. Hence the 
saints were cautious about swearing. In the Life of S. Chryso- 
stom it is recorded as a notable thing that he never swore. The 
same is testified of S. John the Almoner. 

You will ask whether also for Christians it is lawful to swear ? 
For (1) many of the Fathers seem to say that it is not. SS. 
Jerome, Chrysostom, Euthymius, say that swearing was permitted 
by God to the Jews, lest they should swear by idols, but is not 
permitted to Christians. (2) Theophylact and Euthymius are of 
opinion that an oath was a legal precept of the old law, like cir- 
cumcision. Wherefore, as the latter has been done away by 
Christ, so has the former. (3) Others think that an oath was 
allowed by God to the Jews, as being uninstructed, imperfect, and 
hard of belief, but has been forbidden to Christians because more 
perfect things become them as being more perfect, and because 
they ought to beware of the slightest peril of perjury. That in 
the same way divorce was permitted to the Jews, lest they should 
kill the wives whom they hated ; and yet Christ takes away this 
permission from Christians. Thus think S. Hilary ( mloc ., Can . 4), 
S. Ambrose (in Ps. 119, Serm. 1), S. Basil (in Ps. 13), Chromatius 
and Origen (in loc., Tract. 35), Epiphanius (Hares. 19), S. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


232 


VARIOUS OPINIONS 


Athanasius (Serm. de Passions et Cruce Donum) , S. Chrysostom 
( Horn . ad pop ,) . 

If you object that in Holy Scripture God took an oath, as in 
Gen. xxii. 16, SS. Athanasius, Basil, .and Ambrose answer that 
such oaths of God were not strictly speaking* oaths, but assevera- 
ions only — or promises; or, as S. Ambrose says, God may 
swear because He is able to fulfil that which He swears, and He 
cannot repent of it. But a man ought not to swear because he 
has not any certain power of doing that to which he pledges his 
oath. 

If, further, you object that surely S. Paul swore when he said 
(2 Cor. i. 23), “I call God to witness upon my soul” (Vulg.), S. Basil 
answers that this is not really an oath, but only a simple mode 
of speech, uttered with the appearance and form of an oath as a 
stronger affirmation. 

But I say that not to the Jews only, but to Christians, is it lawful 
to swear. This is of faith, as is plain from the perpetual sense, 
use, and practice of the Church. “ For of all strife among men * 
—even Christians — “an oath for confirmation is the end,” says 
the Apostle to the Hebrews (vi. 16). Moreover, in Scripture 
there is no affirmative precept for swearing, as there is for praying, 
sacrificing, loving and praising God, honouring parents, &c., 
because an oath is not, per se, desirable, but only for the sake of 
something else, and, as it were, per accidens , in such sort that it is 
a kind of medicine for unbelief. And there is a negative precept 
for swearing, namely that you shall not commit perjuiy or swear 
by false gods, but only by the true God. There is also a condi- 
tional precept that if you swear you shall only swear what is just, 
true, and necessary. 

You may say, Christ here solemnly says to Christians, Swear not 
at all. I answer, this is true because, per se, it is unbecoming and 
improper to call the Great and Good God to witness about human 
disputes on account of men's mutual distrusts, unless this impro- 
priety may be excused by mutual necessity, as it is often excused 
by the want of witnesses and other judicial proofs. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



OF THE FATHERS. 


233 


To the Fathers who have been cited, I reply that they seem to 
have spoken in the same sense that Christ did, because they saw 
men often swearing falsely or unjustly, and, still more frequently, 
lightly, foolishly and rashly; hence on account of the peril of these 
things, they forbade an oath to Christians, that they should refrain 
from it as much as possible. But if any one is careful to avoid 
such dangers, then it is lawful for him to swear in a case of 
necessity. This is plain from S. Chrysostom, who, in his homilies 
to the people of Antioch, frequently and sharply rebuked their 
habit of rash swearing. And to those who wondered at his so 
doing, he thus replies : “ I say and repeat, as I am accustomed, 
because ye say and repeat what ye are accustomed." And he 
declares that he will not cease from this repetition until they leave 
off swearing. “ For a hard knot a hard and constant wedge 
must be used" 

Neither by heaven, &c. It seems that the Jews were wont to swear 
by heaven and earth, and similar oaths. And because the 
Pharisees thought that these oaths, being made by creatures, were 
of small account, Christ here teaches the contrary — viz., that he 
who swears by heaven or earth, swears by God their Creator, who 
has placed the throne of His glory in heaven, and his footstool on 
•earth. 

Ver. 37 . — But let your communication be, &c. — t\e., a simple affir- 
mation, or negation. For what is more than these, Gr. irtpimrov. The 
Syriac has, what is added beyond these . In the Hebrew Gospel ascribed 
to S. Matthew, we have pK p« ain, ain, p p ken, ken — that is 
no, no, so, so . In this passage a simple affirmation or negation is 
opposed to an oath; so in S. James (v. 12) ; and it means that 
whatever is added to these in the way of swearing, is of evil. So 
S. Chrysostom and S. Jerome, or rather Paulinus, Epist. ad 
Celantium . 

Of evil . Evil here may be taken either in the masculine or the 
■neuter gender. If the masculine the devil is meant, who, as a 
ringleader of ail iniquity, incites thee to swear without necessity, 
and so draws thee on by degrees to swear falsely, which is the sin 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



234 


LEX TALIONIS. 


of perjury. So Theophylact, Maldonatus, and others. If you 
take the neuter, it means cometh of vice , either your own or another's 
— that is to say, the custom of swearing arises either from your 
own vice of levity or irreverence, or else from another man's incre- 
dulity and distrust. Because a man does not believe my simple* 
assertion, I confirm my words by an oath, which, however, is a fault 
become necessary since the fall of man. So S. Augustine. 

Vers. 38 and 39. — You have heard, &c. This was the law of 
retaliation. But Isay unto you, Resist not evil . That is, an evil or 
unjust thing, or an injury done to thee by a wicked man. That is, 
do not requite evil by evil, injury by injury. Or better, resist not 
evil, taking evil in the masculine — t\e., the evil man who injures you- 
The Greek is T<g irovrjpv, though both meanings amount to much the 
same thing. 

Note — I. That the ancient lex talioms was just, but in practice it 
was often unjust, and sprang from a desire of revenge, by which 
one who had had an eye or tooth plucked out brought before the 
magistrate the person who had injured him, and demanded, by 
way of retaliation, that his eye or tooth should be plucked out- 
But Christ supplies the deficiency of this law and perfects it. by 
opposing to the lex talioms the law and counsel of patience, and to- 
a disposition thirsting for revenge the law of meekness. 

Note— 2. That this law of Christ has not regard to magistrates, 
as Anabaptists say, that all war not only offensive, but even- 
defensive, is forbidden to Christians by Christ, but has regard to- 
private persons ; for it is the office of the magistrate to scourge 
the guilty and to put murderers to death. 

Note — 3. This law of Christ does not take away from private 
individuals the lex talioms, which is of the law of nations and of 
nature, both for the reparation of offended justice and for the 
correction of the guilty person who has offended ; much less does 
it take away the right of defending ourselves when we are 
attacked by an enemy, but only forbids the desire of vengeance. 

Note — 4. That Christ here wishes to imprint upon us a dispo- 
sition to meekness and patience, that however much thou mayest 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



JOHN FERNANDEZ, THE JESUIT. 


235 


De injured, yet still that thou shouldst not depart so much as a 
hair's breadth from inward peace and charity; and that if love of 
your neighbour and the glory of God, in any conjuncture of cir- 
cumstances, should absolutely require that you resist not evil, but 
patiently accept it, that you should in such a case do as the first 
Christians did — suffer joyfully the spoiling of your goods, or even 
the deprivation of life itself. I say then, with regard to these 
three cases spoken of by Christ, If any one mite thee on thy right, 
cheek , turn to him the other also ; If any one will take away thy coat, 
let him have thy cloke also ; Whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go 
with him twain , that they are, speaking generally, matters of 
counsel, not of direct precept ; but if the salvation of our 
neighbour and the glory of God require them to be done, then 
they are of precept. For instance, if the Indians or the 
Japanese knew that Christ has commanded Christians to turn the 
other cheek to him who smote them upon one cheek, and unless 
they did so those heathens would be scandalized and turned away 
from embracing the faith of Christ, then I say that it would be the 
bounden duty of any Christian, but especially of a preacher, to 
turn the other cheek to him who smote him upon one. There is 
a literal example of this in the life of S. Francis Xavier, the 
Apostle of India and Japan. When the Japanese were laughing 
at him as a foreigner, and at his new doctrine concerning Christ 
crucified, it happened that a certain Japanese, hearing John 
Fernandez, a companion of Xavier, preaching in the street, out of 
petulance spat in his face. Fernandez, in no way disturbed, 
quietly wiped away the spittle, and proceeded with his discourse. 
The Japanese were so filled with admiration at his patience and 
struck with the wisdom of the new preachers, that they gave 
themselves to them as disciples, and in great numbers embraced 
the faith of Christ. 

Lastly, it is a distinguishing characteristic of a martyr not to 
resist, not to defend himself, but to suffer himself to be slain for 
Christ. For, “ a soldier fights, not a martyr." A martyr is a 
sharer in the Passion of Christ, as the martyrs write to S. Cyprian, 


' Digitized by L^ooQle 


236 


SAINT SPIRIDION. 


(lib. 5, Efts/. 12.) For the passion of Christ is the pattern of all 
martyrdom. 

Wherefore that Theban Legion of very many and very brave 
soldiers, being condemned to death by the Emperor Maximian, 
because they would not sacrifice to idols, when soldiers were sent 
amongst them to slay them, would not defend themselves, even 
though they might have sold their lives dear and made an immense 
. slaughter of their enemies. But at the instigation and exhortation 
of S. Mauritius, they piled their arms and suffered themselves t q 
be immolated like a flock of lambs, for the sake of Christ. It was 
Christ who taught this new philosophy, a paradox to the world, 
unknown to the philosophers, unheard of among men, but heavenly 
and divine, and confirmed the same by His own example, when 
He willingly gave Himself up to the Jews to be bound, scourged, 
and crucified. Whence He says Himself, “ I gave my back to 
the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair." 
(Is. 1 . 6.) 

Whosoever shall smile thee on thy right cheek, &c. This is, as I have 
said, a matter sometimes of precept, sometimes of counsel. Com- 
pliance with it flows from a generous mind, prompt to suffer, and 
earnestly desirous of imitating the Life and Passion of Christ. 
Hence S. Ambrose by the right cheek mystically understand! 
patience, which conquers all things. “ For as,” saith he, “ Samson 
by the jaw-bone of an ass slew a thousand Philistines, so Chris! 
by His patience overthrew the demons and all His enemies.” 

Thus that glorious Spiridion, Bishop of Trimituns, in Cyprus, 
being invited by the Emperor Constantine to visit him on account 
of the fame of his sanctity, when he was entering the imperial 
palace in a mean and foreign garb, was derided by one of the 
servants and slapped on the cheek. On receiving it he imme- 
diately turned the other cheek, on which the servant was so struck 
with his virtue, that he became ashamed, and falling down on the 
ground at his feet begged him to forgive him. (See Spiridion's 
Life in Surius, Decemb. 12.) 

Similarly, a monk who was slapped on one cheek by an 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



SAINT EULOGIUS. 


23 ? 


energumen, offered her the other; and by this drove out the 
devil. Hear the account (Auc/or. Doctrines Pat. Tract . de humilitate 
n. 5) ; “ When the monk entered into the house, there came the 
girl who was vexed by the devil, and gave the monk a slap in the 
face, but he, according to the Divine precept, offered her his 
other cheek to slap. The devil, being constrained, began to cry 
out, *Ol The power of the precepts of Jesus Christ drives me 
hence/ And immediately the girl was cleansed. When the 
monk came to some old men, he told them what had been done, 
and they glorified God, saying, Tt is the habit of diabolical pride 
to fall before the lowliness of the commands of Jesus / 99 

Cassian celebrates the patience of a certain religious man, who 
in order to try his virtue, received a very sharp slap on his cheek 
from his Abbot Paul in a large assemblage, and so severe was the 
blow that it was heard by a number of persons who were sitting 
a considerable distance off. Yet not only did not the monk 
murmur, but his face was not even suffused with a blush, as is 
usual. 

Lastly, S. Eulogius, presbyter and martyr of Cordova, 
being sentenced to death by a Saracen prince because he had 
spoken evil of Mahomet, whilst he was being led to martyrdom, 
was struck by a Saracen on his cheek. He offered him the other, 
when he received another slap upon that. Soon afterwards he 
was beheaded, when a dove came and sat upon his body, a sign 
and a vindication of his dove-like meekness,’ innocence, and 
patience. This happened a . d . 859, on the 1 ith day of March. 

And if any man will sue thee at the law, &c. The cloak is an 
outer garment, and often of considerable value; the coat in this 
passage is an inner garment, whence the saying, “Your coat is 
nearer than your cloak.” Wherefore the coat cannot be plucked 
away until the cloak has been taken off. So S. Luke rightly 
inverts the order of the two, and says, And him that taketh away thy 
cloke forbid not to take away thy coat also . But the meaning is the 
same in both. If any one shall take one garment away from thee, 
do not go to law with him to recover it, but rather let him take 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



2 3 8 


S. ELIZABETH OF HUNGARY. 


possession of another, if he will. S. Francis did this literally. 
On account of his profuse almsdeeds he was taken by his father 
before the Bishop of Assisi, that he might be made to give up 
his property. Not only did he yield up his other goods, but he 
resigned even his clothes to his father, saying, “ Now shall I say 
more boldly, ‘Our Father, which art in heaven/ ” S. Elizabeth, 
daughter of the King of Hungary, afforded in this matter a rare 
example of patience and poverty. After the death of her 
husband, the Landgrave of Hesse, she was expelled with the 
utmost indignity by his vassals and relations from her home, she 
was despoiled of all she had, and reduced to the most extreme 
poverty. With joy and alacrity she went to a Franciscan 
convent; and there she asked the brethren to sing Te Deum 
laudamus in thanksgiving to God. Afterwards she wandered from 
house to house, like a beggar, with her children, and at last 
entered a hut, where she was tormented with the smoke, heat, 
wind, and rain, yet always did she give God thanks. The insults, 
reproaches, and scoffs of her relations she joyfully endured, being 
glad that she was counted worthy to suffer such things for God. 
At length, her father, King Andrew, begged her to go back to 
Hungary to share in the royal splendour. She would not, but in 
great poverty, gaining her own living by spinning wool, she 
spent the rest of her life, performing the most menial offices for 
poor, ulcerated, and leprous people. And so, a little before her 
death, she heard the singing of the angels, and the sweet voice of 
Christ calling her to His heavenly kingdom — “Come, My 
chosen one, and enjoy the bed in heaven which I have destined 
for thee from all eternity/' (See her Life in Surius, Nov . 19.) 

And whoso shall compel thee to go a mile, Gr. <iyyiapi£ctv. 
Angiare is a Persian word. The Persian royal messengers and 
postmen were called angari. They had the right of seizing horses, 
men or ships, and enforcing their service, so that angiare has the 
same meaning as to impound \ compel . Hence the words Angaria 
and Parangarice in law books. In Hebrew iggheret means a Utter, 
that which is carried by angari or runners . 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



BROTHER JUNIPER* 


239 


The meaning is — If any one shall force thee to go one mile with 
him, go to the second mile-post rather than contend ; so will you 
keep peace, exercise patience, and conquer by your charity him 
who compels you, and make him your friend. 

And let not believers think that this is too difficult for them to 
do. S. Basil (in his Homily on reading heathen books) shows that 
philosophers taught and did as much. For instance, Pericles, who, 
upon a certain occasion, had suffered abuse from a person during 
a whole day, took him home in the evening with a light. Of 
Julius Caesar, Cicero says that he forgot nothing except injuries. 
But those things were but shadows of Christian virtues, which 
existed in a far greater and more solid degree in S. Paul, 
S. Laurence, S. Vincent, who gave thanks to their tormentors for 
weaving for them their martyrs' crowns. S. Cyprian ordered twenty 
pieces of gold to be given to the executioner who was to behead 
him. Brother Juniper, the companion of S. Francis, received 
taunts as Christ's jewels. Once to him who reproached him, he 
cried, “Cast your jewels into my lap; would that I might be 
stoned with precious stones like these all the way to Rome I" In 
the Lives of the Fathers we read of a certain religious man, who 
the more any one vexed him, or laughed at him, the more he 
rejoiced, saying, “These are the men who afford us an opportunity 
of becoming perfect; but they who commend us disturb our minds, 
for it is written, ‘They who speak well of you are those who 
deceive you.' " 

Climacus ( Gradu 4 de ObedieniiA) says that a certain religious, 
named Abbakirus, suffered divers trials and tribulations at the 
hands of his brethren for fifteen years. He was even driven from 
table by the servants. But he bore all patiently, and took none of 
the indignities offered to him seriously, but as proving him. And 
when he lay a-dying he said, “ I give thanks to Jesus Christ the 
Lord, and to you, that ye have tried me unto salvation, for, io! for 
these seventeen years I have remained untempted of the devil." The 
same Climacus relates that an old man, named Macedonius, who 
by his own desire had been sent among the novices, said, “ Never 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


240 


S. JOHN THE ALMONER. 


have I felt freedom from all strife and the sweetness of divine light 
within my soul as I do now.” 

Give to him that asketh, &c. At first sight the precept might not 
seem to be in harmony with what has gone before concerning the 
lex talionis, but it is indeed in perfect harmony. The meaning is 
this — I, Christ, instead of the law of retaliation, appoint a law of 
love and kindness. Wherefore, whosoever asketh anything of thee, 
be he friend or be he enemy who has injured thee, or smitten thee 
on the cheek, or taken away thy cloak, give him what he asks ; 
and if he should desire to borrow from thee, turn not thy face away 
from him, as people are wont to do, but treat him kindly as a 
neighbour, and lend him that he requires, as though he had never 
injured thee. 

In fine, the sermon and sanction of Christ here does not decrease 
but increases, for although it may be easier per se to give to every 
one that asketh thee, than when thou art smitten upon one cheek 
to offer the other to the smiter, yet it is more difficult in the connec- 
tion, which implies both the patience which suffers such things and 
such men, and the beneficence by which we give or lend to those 
who ask us. For it is more difficult to do a kindness to one who 
has injured us, than simply to bear an injury patiently. So S. 
Augustine, lib . de Serm. Dorn ., c. 40. 

The liberality of S. John, Patriarch of Alexandria, is well 
known. Encouraged by these words of Christ, he gave large alms 
to all who asked him, whence he derived his name of the Almoner. 
And the more he gave the more he received, so that it seemed as 
though there were a strife between God and him who should be 
the more liberal. For John overcame God, but much more did 
God overcome John. John would not examine those who asked 
him, whether they were rich or poor, worthy or unworthy, few or 
many. “I am persuaded,” he said, “that if the whole world 
should come to Alexandria, needing alms, they would be very far 
from exhausting the treasury of God.” 

S. Francis, upon one occasion, shortly after his conversion, 
refused, contrary to his custom, to give an alms to a poor man. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



WHO OUR NEIGHBOUR. 


241 


But he very soon afterwards repented of his refusal, and gave the 
man a large alms ; and he made a vow that in future he would 
never refuse to give when he was asked. By this his liberality, 
he drew down upon him that abundant grace of God by which 
he attained to such eminent sanctity. 

That is a rare thing which we read in the Chronicles of the 
Franciscans concerning Alexander Aleusis, who was called a 
fountain of life, and who was the teacher of S. Bonaventura. His 
affection for the Mother of God was so great that he would never 
deny anything to any one who asked him in her name. A certain 
Franciscan got to know of this, and, seeing that he was by far the 
the most celebrated Doctor of the University of Paris, came to 
him and said, “ By S. Mary, I beg of you to become one of us." 
He believed the man was sent by God, and immediately followed 
him, and became a Franciscan Brother. 

Ver. 41. — Ye have heard \ &c. It has been asked, where is it said, 
“ Thou shalt hate thine enemy ?" Maldonatus replies, in Deut. xxv. 
19, “Thou shalt blot out his name from under heaven." God had 
commanded Joshua and the Hebrews utterly to destroy the im- 
pious Canaanites, and to seize their land. But the Law bade only 
the Canaanites to be slain, not other nations, and even them, not 
out of hatred : just as a judge might order a guilty person to be 
put to death, not because he hated him, but even one whom he 
loved. 

I maintain, therefore, that this saying was not in the Law, but 
was said by the Scribes who interpreted the Law. For they, 
because they found in Lev. xix. 18, “Thou shalt love thy neigh- 
bour," or “thy friend," as the Vulgate translates, inferred from 
thence that they should hate their enemies. Wherefore Christ 
here corrects this interpretation of theirs, and explains the Law, 
that by neighbour or friend every man is meant, even a foreigner, 
a Gentile, and an enemy. For all men are neighbours, through 
their first forefather, Adam, and brethren one of another. We are 
also brethren through our second Father, Christ, through whom 
we have been born again, and, as it were, created anew in the 

R 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


242 


IMITATION OF GOD. 


likeness of God, and called to the common inheritance of God, our 
Father in heaven. So S. Jerome, Augustine, Theophylact, and 
others. 

But I say unto you, &c. Christ here bids us love our enemies in 
heart, in word, and in deed. In heart, when He says, “ Love 
your enemies ;” in word, “ Bless them that curse you;” in deed, 
by adding, “Do good to them that hate you.” 

That ye may he the children of your Father, &c. Christ bids that 
in loving our enemies we should imitate God, who does good to 
his impious enemies, giving them rain and sunshine, corn and 
fruits. For the mind of God is so lofty, that He regards no injury 
or blasphemy of any one, however impious, as done against Him- 
self. He perceives no diminution of His honour and glory. He 
is so impassible and so holy that no anger or revenge Can affect 
Him, and so good and clement that He showers His gifts upon 
His enemies, preventing them with His grace, and alluring and 
drawing them to reconciliation. Yea, He gave up His only Son 
to be crucified, that He might reconcile them and save them. Let 
us imitate these things as far as we can. 

For if ye love them, &c. The publicans were so called because 
they farmed and collected the public taxes. And they extorted 
from the poor with the utmost rigour more than they had a right 
to pay. For this reason they were accounted by the Jews iniqui- 
tous and infamous. 

What reward have ye ? None: for if ye love your friends only, 
not your enemies, ye only do as the publicans do, and God will 
give you no reward in heaven. For such love is of nature, not 
of grace and charity, which latter love extends itself even to 
enemies. And ye do receive a reward from your friends, namely, 
reciprocal love. But if ye love your enemies as well as your 
friends, ye will deserve and obtain great grace and glory from 
God, since both kinds of love are the fruit of charity. Charity 
therefore bids us love both friends and enemies, corrupt nature 
our friends only. 

Publius Sulla was wont to boast that he surpassed his friends 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



EXAMPLE OF LYCURGUS. 


243 


in benefits, his enemies in injuries. Other heathen did the same. 
There were indeed a few among them who did love even their 
enemies. Such was Phocion, who being condemed to death, and 
at point of execution, being asked what message he would send 
to his son, made answer, “ I wish him to forget this injury which 
the Athenians have done to me.” 

Lycurgus, King of the Lacedaemonians, being deprived of an 
eye by a certain young man, the youth was presented to him by 
the people that he should punish him in any way he pleased. 
Lycurgus took the youth, and gave him excellent instruction ; and 
when he had quite reformed his character, he brought him into 
the theatre, and presented him to the people, saying, “Lol him 
whom I received from you violent and injurious I restore to you 
profitable and acceptable.” See Plutarch in Life of Lycurgus. 
If the Gentiles, led by nature and reason, did such things as these, 
for the sake of temporal glory, what ought not Christians to do, 
led by faith and grace for the reward of a blissful eternity ? 

And if ye salute your brethren only, &c. Brethren, i.e., relations, 
kinsfolk , friends . Salute . Gr. Sucnraxrrpi)* salute with a kiss and 

embrace, which was the customary method of salutation among 
the Greeks and Romans, and indeed amongst the first Christians, 
according to those words of S. Paul, “ Salute one another with an 
holy kiss.” (2 Cor. xiii. 12.) 

Be ye therefore perfect, &c. The emphasis here is upon the word 
ye. Because ye are separated from the heathen, and chosen of God, 
that ye should be His faithful ones, His friends, His sons and 
heirs, therefore imitate the holiness and perfection of your 
Heavenly Father. 

The word therefore refers partly to what immediately precedes 
concerning love of our enemies. “ Do ye therefore, O faithful, 
who are the friends of God, and who ought therefore to be better 
than the heathen, do you love all men, enemies as well as friends, 
even as your Father wholly extends His love to all.” But the 
therefore also partly refers to all that has gone before. For this 
maxim is the end and completion of all the sayings of this 

r 2 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



244 


PERFECTION. 


chapter, as though Christ said, “ Thus far I have unfolded the 
commandments of God, which are the sanction of the perfection 
of all virtue. Be ye therefore perfect in meekness, in purity of 
heart, in patience, in chastity, in charity, and in every virtue which 
the Law of God enjoins.” 

You will ask whether this perfection be of counsel or of precept? 
I reply, partly of counsel, partly of precept. First, it is of precept 
that every believer in Christianity should endeavour to be perfect, 
in such wise that he should perfectly love his enemies as well as 
his friends, and keep perfectly all the other commandments of God. 
For Christ is here speaking to all the faithful, as is plain from 
what precedes. Hence we learn from this passage that all 
Christians are under obligation to be advancing towards per- 
fection according to their state and condition. For this is required 
that they should be the children of their Heavenly Father, as 
Christ says. Whosoever therefore desires to be the child and heir 
of this Father ought to imitate Him in perfection ; because, as S. 
Cyprian says ( Strm . debono Patient.), “The children of such and so 
great a Parent ought not to be degenerate.” 

Moreover, S. James (chap, i.), addressing not religious, but all 
believers, says: “That ye may be perfect and entire, wanting 
nothing.” For if soldiers in battle wish to be most brave, disciples 
in a school most learned, workmen, each in their own craft, most 
exact, servants in obeying their own masters most diligent, why 
should not Christians, who are called by Christ to holiness and 
perfection, wish to be most holy and most perfect? 

Blessed Theresa was wont to say that God has an especial love 
for those who are perfect, and makes them, as it were, captains 
and generals of others, that they should convert, save, and perfect 
many. Wherefore she herself made a vow that in every work she 
would do that which should be more perfect, and for the greater 
glory of God. See S. Chrysostom (lib. 3. de Vitupcrat. vita Monas/. J, 
where he teaches that the precepts of Christ bind seculars as well 
as religious, and that therefore both ought to aim at perfection, 
each in his own state and rank, according to that which God said 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



GOD LOVES ALL MEN. 24$ 

to Israel, “Thou shalt be perfect and without spot before the 
Lord thy God.” (Deut. xviii. 13.) 

2. This perfection is of counsel so far as it extends itself to the 
observance, not only of commands, but of evangelical counsels, 
such as voluntary poverty, chastity, and religious obedience; 
such, I mean, as when Christ said, “ If thou wilt be perfect, sell 
that thou hast and give to the poor.” (Matt. xix. 21.) 

Moreover, this perfection mainly consists in charity and love, 
especially of our enemies. For this is the perfection of life , since 
the perfection of the country consists in the vision and fruition of 
God. Christ here tacitly intimates that the way of attaining per- 
fection and eminent sanctity is for any one to exercise himself in 
love of his enemies, both because this is the highest and most 
difficult act of charity, as because it is the greatest victory over 
ourselves. For he who does this generously vanquishes anger, 
revenge, and the other passions of the soul ; and God requites his 
charity with far more abundant gifts of grace. So that holy 
virgin mentioned by D. Tauler, when asked how she had attained 
to so great sanctity, replied, “I have ever loved with a special 
love any who have been troublesome to me ; and to any one who 
has injured me, I have always endeavoured to show some special 
mark of kindness.” 

As your Father which is in heaven , &c. For He with a perfect love 
loves all men. Upon all He sheds the beams of His beneficence, 
as it were a perennial sun of kindness, Who expects not to derive 
any advantage from any one, but out of pure love desires to 
communicate His benefits to others, that thus He may contend 
with the wickedness and ingratitude of man ; for few indeed are 
they who love Him, their Benefactor, in return as they should do. 
The word as signifies likeness, not equality ; for we cannot come 
up to the perfection of God, for that infinitely transcends all our 
perfection ; but we ought to imitate it as far as we are able. 

The perfection then which Christ here requires of a Christian 
is not merely human but Divine perfection, and similar to God’s 
perfection. For he is our Father not only by nature, but by 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



246 


WAYS AND MEANS 


grace, for by it “ we are partakers of the Divine nature,” as S. 
Peter says. Therefore we are made to be really sons of God, 
and as it were gods upon earth. And so S. Peter proposes the 
words in Lev. xi. 44 as a kind of mirror for Christians saying, “ Ye 
shall be holy, for I am holy.” (1 Pet. i. 16.) And S. Paul says, 
“Be ye imitators of God as dear children.” (Eph. v. 1.) 
Beautifully says S. Cyprian, “ If it be a pleasure and glory to men 
to have children like themselves, how much more is there gladness 
with God our Father, when any one is so born spiritually, that 
the Divine nobility is manifest in his actions ?” 

1. The perfection of God consists in the most ample love of all 
men, bad as well as good. And it is to this Christ has special 
reference in this passage. 

2. It consists in the highest forbearance, kindness, and tran- 
quillity, and the impossibility of being affected by injury, wrath, 
or revenge, so that He is imperturbable and without passions. 
So in like manner must we, if we would be perfect, be meek and 
tranquil, and to that end must mortify anger and all other mental 
passions. Whence S. Ambrose says (lid. de Jacob et vita beatd ), 
“ It is the part of a perfect man to sustain like a brave soldier 
the onset of the most terrible misfortunes, and like a wise pilot to 
manage his ship in a storm, and as he runs through the surging 
billows, to avoid shipwreck rather by facing the waves than by 
shrinking from them.” 

Hence we shall find it a singularly efficacious means of attaining 
perfection for every one to search carefully into the state of his 
own soul, and find out his chief vice, from which, like branches 
from a root, all his other faults spring, and to strive against this 
with all his might until he root it out. For example, the radical 
and dominating vice in Peter is pride, in Paul gluttony, in James 
luxury, in John acerbity, in Philip anger, in Andrew sadness, in 
Matthew pusillanimity. Let every man know his own vice, 
and when it is known, let him fight against it with suitable 
weapons and mortify it. 

3. God looks down from on high upon all earthly things as 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



OF ATTAINING PERFECTION. 


247 


mean and poor, and gloriously presides over heaven and heavenly 
things. So in like manner, ought the man who is aiming at 
perfection to despise earthly honours and pleasures as worthless 
matters, pertaining to flies and gnats and fleas, and ought to look 
up to and covet the heavenly things, which are God's. 

4. The mind and will of God are most just, holy, and perfect. 
With this mind, then, ought we to be clothed, that we may be 
like God — yea, one with God. Hear what S. Bernard says about 
this: “The unity of a man's spirit with God is his having his 
heart lifted up towards God, and entirely directed to Him ; when 
he only wills what God wills; when there is not only affection, 
but perfect affection for God, so that he cannot will anything save 
and except what God wills. For to will what God wills is to be 
already like God. But not to be able to will except what God 
wills, this is to be what God is, to whom to will and to be are the 
same thing. 

5. God is of a great and lofty mind, which transcends all things, 
and which ever abides and is established in His own blessed and 
tranquil eternity, and so converts and draws all things to Himself. 
Hear, again, S. Bernard (ad Fratres de Monte Dei ) : “Thou shalt, 
amid the adverse and prosperous changes and chances of the 
world, hold fast as it were an image of eternity ; I mean an in- 
violable and unshaken constancy of mind, blessing God at all 
times, and vindicating for thyself, even in the uncertain events of 
this changeful world, and in its certain troubles, to some extent at 
least, a condition of abiding unchangeableness, so shalt thou 
begin to be changed and formed anew into the image and like 
ness of the eternal God, with whom is no changeableness, neither 
shadow of turning; for as He is, so also shalt thou be in this 
world, neither fearful in adversity nor dissolute in prosperity." 

Lastly, all perfection in this life is begun only, and is imperfect. 
For concupiscence, like a Jebusite, dwelleth in our members, and 
can be kept under, but not entirely extirpated ; but in heaven, 
perfection shall be full and complete, where this corruptible shall 
put on incorruption, and this mortal shall put on a blessed im- 


Digitized by ^ooQle 


248 


WHAT S. PAUL SAYS, 


mortality, where death and concupiscence shall be swallowed up 
of glory, and God shall be all in all. There shall be no covetous- 
ness, where love shall fill all things. Whence the Apostle says of 
himself (Philip, iii. 12) : — “Not as though I had already attained, 
either were already perfect: but I follow after, if that I may 
apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus. 
Brethren, I count not myself to have apprehended : but this one 
thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching 
forth unto those things which are before, I press towards the mark 
for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.” 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


CHAPTER VI. 


V Christ continuetk his sermon in the mounts speaking of alms, 5 prayer, 14 for- 
giving our brethren, 16 fasting, 19 where our treasure is to be laid up, 24 of 
serving God, and mammon : 25 ex korteth not to be careful for worldly things : 
33 but to seek Gods kingdom, 

T AKE heed that ye do not your alms before men, to be seen of them : 
otherwise ye have no reward of your Father which is in heaven. 

2 Therefore, when thou doest thine alms, do not sound a trumpet before thee, 
as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets that they may have 
glory of men. Verily I say unto you. They have their reward. 

3 But when thou doest alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand 
doeth : 

4 That thine alms may be in secret: and thy Father, which seeth in secret, 
himself shall reward thee openly : 

5 And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the hypocrites are : for they 
Jove to pray standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that 
they may be seen of men. Verily I say unto you. They have their reward. 

6 But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and, when thou hast shut 
thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret ; and thy Father, which seeth in 
secret, shall reward thee openly. 

7 But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen do: for they think 
that they shall be heard for their much speaking. 

8 Be not ye therefore like unto them : for your Father knoweth what things 
ye have need of, before ye ask him. 

9 After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father which art in heaven, 
hallowed be thy name : 

10 Thy kingdom come: thy will be done, in earth as it is in heaven: 

1 1 Give us this day our daily bread : 

12 And forgive ns our debts, as we forgive our debtors : 

13 And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil : for thine is the 
kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen. 


Digitized by ^ooQle 



250 

14 For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also for* 
give you : 

15 But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive 
your trespasses. 

16 Moreover, when ye fast, be not, as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance r 
for they disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to fast. Verily I 
say unto you. They have their reward. 

17 But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy face ; 

18 That thou appear not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father which is in 
secret : and thy Father, which seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly. 

19 Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust 
doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal : 

20 But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust 
doth corrupt, and where thieves do not breakthrough nor steal: 

21 For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also. 

22 The light of the body is the eye : if therefore thine eye be single, thy whole 
body shall be full of light 

23 But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness. If there- 
fore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness 1 

24 No man can serve two masters : for either he will hate the one, and love 
the other ; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot 
serve God and mammon. 

25 Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, 
or what ye shall drink ; nor yet for your body, what ye shall pat on. Is not the 
life more than meat, and the body than raiment ? 

26 Behold the fowls of the air : for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor 
gather into barns ; yet your heavenly Father feedeth them. Are ye not much 
better than they ? 

27 Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit unto his stature ? 

28 And why take ye thought for raiment ? Consider the lilies of the field, 
how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin: 

29 And yet I say unto you. That even Solomon in all his glory was not 
arrayed like one of these. 

30 Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field, which to-day is, and 
to-morrow is cast into the oven, shall fu not much more clothe you, O ye of little 
faith ? 

31 Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat ? or, What shall we 
drink ? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed ? 

32 (For after all these things do the Gentiles seek :) for your heavenly Father 
knoweth that ye have need of all these things. 

33 But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness ; and all these 
things shall be added unto you. 

34 Take therefore no thought for the morrow : for the morrow shall take 
thought for the things of itself. Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof 


Take heed % &c. Instead of alms, some Greek Codices read 
htKaioavvrjv, righteousness , or justice . This is the reading of the 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



VAIN GLORY. 


25 


Syriac and the Latin Vulgate. The Complutensian, Royal, and 
other Greek Codices read alms . The Arabic translates mercy — of 
which the Saviour speaks next. For this is in Scripture ko.t 
or par excellence, a common word for righteousness, as I 
have shown on 2 Cor. ix. 10. Hence S. Chrysostom reads justice, 
understanding alms . After Christ in the preceding chapter had 
expounded one by one the precepts of the Law, which prescribe all 
righteousness, i.e., whatever is just ; and right, and holy, or all 
good works, now, in this chapter He proceeds to teach the way of 
doing things holily and rightly, that we should do them with a 
right intention, and with the desire of pleasing God, not man. He 
begins with alms. Then He teaches how we ought to pray, and 
next how to fast; for with these three vain glory is wont chiefly 
to be bound up, says S. Chrysostom. 

That ye may be seen. The word that denotes the intention and the 
end. 44 Do not do holy and just works with this intention and 
object, to be seen and praised of men, for this is vain ostentation. 
But Christ does not here forbid them to be done publicly, and 
advantageously, that men may see them and glorify God. Whence 
S. Gregory says, 44 Let thy works be so done openly that thy 
intention may remain in secret, and that we may afford an example 
of good works to our neighbours, so that yet with our inten- 
tions, by which we seek to please God only, we may always desire 
secrecy." 

Moreover, vain glory eats out all the dignity, worth, and merit 
of good works, like the worm the gourd (Jonah iv.). 

Otherwise ye have no reward, &c. The reward of vain glory is the 
applause and favour of men. He who seeks to please men dis- 
pleases God. For God, forasmuch as He is the author of good 
works, desires to be the object and end of the same, that we should 
do them for God, and refer them to His glory. Wherefore S. Paul 
says, 44 For if I yet pleased men I should not be the servant of 
Christ." 

S. Basil (in Canstit. Monast . c. 11) calls vain glory the robber 
of good works. 44 Let us fly from vain glory," he says, 44 the 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



252 HYPOCRITES LIKE MONSTROUS BEASTS. 

insinuating spoiler of good works, the pleasant enemy of our souls, 
the moth of virtues, the flattering ruin of our good things, who 
colours the poison with the honeyed mixture of her deceit, and 
who holds out to the souls of men her deadly cup. And I think 
she does this that men may the more greedily drink her down, 
and never be satiated with her. How sweet a thing is human 
glory to those who have not had experience of it I " 

When thou doest thine alms do not sound a trumpet before thee . Syr. 
do not blow a horn . When the Scribes and Pharisees were about 
to give away alms in the public streets they either sent a trumpeter 
before them, or else blew a horn themselves, under the pretext of 
drawing together by that means crowds of poor persons, who 
might run and receive alms, but in reality out of ostentation, and 
that their liberality might be seen and talked of by those who 
flocked together. 

Observe that Holy Scripture, the prophets, but above all Christ, 
detest hypocrisy and hypocrites, who intend one thing in their 
heart, and pretend something else outwardly. For Christ is truth, 
simplicity, sincerity itself; wherefore He hates all falsehood and 
duplicity. 

Moreover, hypocrites are like the monstrous beasts which S. 
John saw in the Apocalypse (chap, ix.), for they had the faces of 
women and the tails of scorpions. In the same manner hypocrites 
smile with their faces, and flatter with their mouths, but at the last 
they secretly strike and sting. Yet these very hypocrites, whilst 
they wish to hurt others, hurt themselves far more, “ for there is 
nothing hid which shall not be revealed/' Wherefore their 
hypocrisy and fraud is easily detected, by which means they are 
confounded and lose their fame and credit, and become hateful 
unto all men. Wherefore David prays against hypocrites, and 
at the same time threatens them with most dreadful punishments 
(Ps. cxx.) : “ Deliver my soul, O Lord, from lying lips and 
from a deceitful tongue. What reward shall be given or done 
unto thee, O thou false tongue? Even mighty and sharp arrows 
with hot burning coals." 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



SAINT MARTIN. 


2S3 


They have their reward — their, i.e., their own, viz., what they sought 
for. Again, their own is what is agreeable and congruous with 
their vanity, tnat of which alone they are worthy, that, like chame- 
leons with wind, they may feed upon fleeting popular breath. 
How. foolish are merchants like these, who, when by alms they 
might buy heavenly and eternal riches, neglecting these, prefer 
to buy the empty praise of men, that is, vain words, which beat 
the air, and then pass away 1 

But thou , when thou doest thine alms , dec. Omitting various ex- 
planations which are here collected by Maldonatus, I would say 
briefly, the meaning is as follows : — Avoid ostentation in thine 
alms and thy virtue, and as far as thou canst, seek for secresy, that 
thou mayest not be seen of men, nor thy virtue talked about, that 
if, per impossible, thy left hand could have eyes, it should not be 
able to see what good thy right hand doth, what, or how great 
alms thou dost bestow. It is a parabolical hyperbole common 
among the Syrians. Thus S. Chrysostom, Theophylact, and 
others. And as S. Jerome says in his Epitaph of Fabiola, 
“ Virtue which is concealed rejoices in God as her judge/' 

That thine alms, &c. Openly, i.e., says S. Augustine at the 
Resurrection, “ Thou shalt be blessed, because the poor have not 
wherewith to recompense thee ; but there shall be a recompence 
given thee at the Resurrection of the just, when the Lord, as the 
Apostle says, ‘ shall reveal the hidden things of darkness, and make 
manifest the counsels of the heart, and then shall every man have 
praise of God/ " Just and congruous reward of secret work is 
public praise in the Judgment. For Christ will reward thy secret 
work publicly in the Judgment before God, angels, and men with 
eternal glory. Thus when S. Martin had divided his cloak, and 
given half of it to a poor man, in the night following, Christ 
appeared to Martin, clad in the same cloak, and praised him in 
the presence of the angels, saying, “ Martin, while yet a catechu- 
men, has clothed Me with this garment." 

But if thou make a show of thine alms, or any good work, 
God will hide it so that no one may behold, admire, or remember 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



254 


S. CATHERINE OF SIENNA. 


it: but if thou hide it God will manifest it to the whole world, 
especially in the Day of judgment. Thus S. Gregory gave alms 
to an angel in form of a shipwrecked sailor. He gave him large 
alms, again and again, when the angel asked them, but always in 
secret. But through this he gained the very summit of public 
glory ; for the angel afterwards revealed that it was for this cause 
Gregory had deserved the chief bishopric of the Church. So 
Christ, in the form of a ragged beggar, asked of S. Catherine of 
Sienna first her tunic, then her cape, then her gloves, all of which 
she freely and secretly gave Him. On the following night He 
appeared to her, showing her the tunic bespangled with jewels, 
and promising that he would give her an invisible gown, which 
would preserve her from all cold (wherefore in future she never 
felt any cold), and in heaven public and illustrious glory. (So 
Raymund in her Life.) 

Ver. 5 . — And when ye pray , &c. Foolish and imprudent was this 
vanity and ostentation of the Scribes by which they affected the 
public streets, where was a greater crowd of people, that they 
might stand before them, and exhibit their prayers and devo- 
tion, when they ought rather to have sought for a secret 
place for prayer, in which they might collect their thoughts, 
and converse with God alone without distraction. What there- 
fore is commonly said of three places unfit for study, that it is 
useless at a window, in the street, by the hearth, because of 
the various distractions which occur at those places, may be 
even more truly said of prayer. Prayer is useless at a window, 
in the street, by the hearth. 

Stand praying . From this and other passages Jansen is of 
opinion that the Jews stood, not knelt, to pray. But I say that 
the Priests and Levites sacrificed and sang Psalms to God 
standing, and the people who were, present also stood, because if 
they had knelt they would have been unable to witness the sacrifices, 
especially in a great press of people, on account of the screen, 
three cubits in height, interposed between them and the altar. 
Again the people stood to hear a sermon, or to receive bene- 


Digitized by ^ooQle 



KNEELING IN PRAYER. 


*55 

diction, as m Solomon’s case ; also in a solemn thanksgiving for 
victory, or any similar benefit, as we stand when a Te Deum is 
sung. S. Azarias and his fellows stood and sang the Benediciii 
in the fiery furnace of Babylon. 

But at other times the Jews prayed kneeling, especially in acts 
of adoration or penitence. Especially Solomon at the Dedica- 
tion ot the Temple prayed and worshipped kneeling. For — 
mark this, ye courtiers and delicate ones, who like the Jews, bend 
one knee to Christ — he kneeled with both his knees upon the 
ground. (1 Kings viii. 54). So Daniel kneeled down three times a 
day and worshipped God. So Micah (vi. 6) : “ I will bow my knees to 
the Most High God.” For this is the manner of adoration among 
all nations. Hence the words, “ I will leave me seven thousand 
men in Israel, whose knees have not been bowed to Baal.” And 
God says (Is. xlv. 23), “Every knee shall bow to me.” And 
(2 Chron. xxix. 30), “ They bowed their knee and worshipped.” 
This standing then to pray on the part of the Scribes and Phari- 
sees was a part of their pride and vanity. They thought themselves 
to be worthier and holier than the rest of the people. 

As for Christians, from the very beginning they have been 
accustomed to kneel down to pray. For when Christ was near to 
die, he prayed, kneeling down ; yea, prostrating Himself upon 
the earth. See also S. Peter (Acts be. 40), and S. John (Apoc. 
xix. 10, and xxii. 8) ; and S. Paul (Acts xx. 36; and Eph. iii. 14, 
“ For this cause I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ ”). Christians, therefore, in memory of the fall of Adam 
and his posterity, pray kneeling at all times except Sundays and 
the Paschal season, when they pray standing, in honour and as a 
figure of the Resurrection of Christ, as S. Justin teaches ( Quasi. 
1 1 s), “ Whence is this custom in the Church ? Because we ought 
to retain in everlasting remembrance both our fall through sin, 
and the grace of our Christ by which we have risen again from 
our fall. So for six days we kneel in token of our fall through 
sin, and on the Lord’s Day we stand in token of our deliverance 
from sin and death.” S. Irenaeus teaches that this practice began 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



256 


THY CLOSET. 


m the time of the Apostles. {Lib, de Paschal.) Tertullian enjoins 
the same custom. {Lib. de Corona Militis. c. 3.) 

But thou . . . enter into thy closet. Gr. to/xciov, i>., any private 
place such as thy bedchamber; Vatablus renders, thy cell. 

SS. Augustine, Jerome, and Ambrose understand by closet the 
heart or the mind, and their privacy, as though he who prays 
should enter there and shut it, so that no distractions may creep in 
to draw away the soul from God. As S. Jerome says: “ Shut to 
the door — *>., shut thy lips and pray inwardly in thy mind, as 
Hannah, the mother of Samuel, did" (1 Sam. i. 13). Hear S. 
Ambrose : “ The Saviour says, Enter into thy closet not that which 
is enclosed by walls which shuts up thy bodily limbs, but the closet 
which is within thee, in which thy thoughts are enclosed. This 
closet for prayer is ever near thee, and ever private, of which there * 
is no witness or judge but God alone." “God who," says S. 
Cyprian {Tract, de Oral .), “is the hearer of the heart, not of the 
voice." It was a saying* of Francis, that “the body is a cell, and 
the soul a hermit, which tarries in its cell wheresoever it may be, 
even among men, to pray to the Lord, and meditate upon Him. 
Cassian gives another reason ( Collat. 9, c. 34) : “ We must pray 
in silence, that the intention of our prayer may not become known 
to our enemies the demons, lest they should hinder it." 

This meaning is true, but mystical rather than literal. But there 
is no reason why closet here should not be understood in its plain 
ordinary sense, of any private place. Hear S. Cyprian : “ The 
Lord bids us pray secretly in hidden places apart, in our very 
chambers, because it is more agreeable to faith, in order that we 
may know God is everywhere present, hears and sees all, and in 
the plenitude of His majesty penetrates the most hidden and secret 
places, as it is written : “ Am I a God nigh at hand, and not a God 
afar off." (Jer. xxiii.) 

So, then, Christ does not here condemn public prayer in church, 
which has been the common laudable practice both of Jews and 
Christians, as is plain from 1 Kings viii. 29, Acts i. 24. Tertullian 
(in ApoL c. 30.) writes: “Looking up thitherwards (to heaven), 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



CALVINISTIC PRAYERS. 


257 


we Christians pray, with hands expanded as innocuous, with head 
uncovered, because we are not ashamed.” For the Jews, especially 
the priests, were wont to pray with their heads covered, as I have 
said on the Pentateuch. Our missionaries also in China cover 
their heads when saying* mass, in accordance with an Indult of 
Pope Paul V., because among the Chinese it is a mark of disgrace 
to uncover the head. “Finally,” proceeds Tertullian, “we pray 
without a prompter, because we pray from the heart.” Lastly, 
the temple is the proper place of prayer, in which one and all 
may pray to God as secretly as though they were praying in their 
own bedchambers. 

That is indeed a ridiculous heresy which has sprung up lately 
in Holland, from a wrong understanding of this passage by a 
certain innovator, who rejects all temples, and holds the conven- 
ticles of his sect nowhere but in bedrooms. The Calvinists, too, 
when they ask a blessing before meat, cover their faces with their 
hats, that they may pray in secret ; but then a hat is not a bed* 
chamber, as is very plain. 

Ver. 7. — But . . . much speaking. Gr. Baitologta, i.e., a trifling and 
futile profusion and repetition of words, as if by this their rhetoric 
they would give God information concerning His own affairs, and 
would bend Him to concede what they ask, as orators by their 
rhetoric endeavour to move judges to acquit an accused person. 

Christ therefore here teaches that the essence of prayer does not 
consist in words profuse and drawn out, but in converse of the 
soul with God; and that the object, and, as it were, the soul of 
prayer is the desire and pious affection of the mind, which, how- 
ever, does not, of course, exclude outward expression in words. 

Be ye not therefore like unto them , &c. It means, the heathen think 
that God is ignorant, or at least does not consider their miseries and 
wants, from which they pray God to deliver them. They use, there- 
fore, many words, that they themselves may tell Him of them. But 
they err, for God knows and considers their wants far more than 
those who pray. Still He wishes to be prayed to, and often He 
wili not succour without being asked, that men may recognize both 

s 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



258 


THE LORD'S PRAYER. 


their own miseries and God's mercies, and may know that they 
are not delivered by their own merit, but by the gift and grace of 
God. S. Augustine adds, “ that God in prayer exercises our 
desire, that by it we may be able to receive what he is preparing 
to give. For that is something very great indeed, but we are too 
small and narrow to receive it.” 

Thus therefore ye shall pray : Our Father , See. Christ here delivers 
to Christians a method of prayer, but He does not command that 
we should use these words and none else, but only teaches the 
things which should be asked of God, and in what order and with 
what brevity they may be asked. Well, however, does the Church 
use these very words of Christ, as being divine, most brief, clear, 
and efficacious. Whence S. Cyprian (Trac. de Orat. Domini) says, 
“ What can be more real prayer to the Father than that which 
proceeded from the mouth of the Son, who is the Truth ? ” 

Note, the Lord’s prayer comprises all the things which should 
be asked of God, whence Tertullian {lib. de Orat. i) calls it the 
Breviary , that is, the compendium of the Gospel, in the same way 
that the Ecclesiastical Office recited daily by priests is a com- 
pendium of the whole of Scripture, whence it is commonly called 
the Breviary . 

S. Augustine ( Epist . 121 , lib. 2, de Verb. Dom .), and Theologians 
after him, divide this prayer into seven petitions, the three first 
of which deal with the honour of God, the remaining four with 
our service. For first, before everything else, we must seek the 
honour of God. For this is our end, and involves our beatitude, 
and the means by which we may attain unto it 

Our Father. This, says Tertullian, is the title of goodness and 
power. By Father , S. Cyprian, Chrysostom, and Ruperti, under- 
stand the First Person of the Sacred Trinity, for to Him as it 
were the principium of the Trinity, the Church addresses most of 
the prayers, or collects in the Mass, and desires that they may be 
heard through the merits of the Son, saying, Through our Lord 
Jesus Christy Thy Son. But other writers more correctly under- 
stand the whole Trinity or Godhead, because all the Three 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



OUR FATHER, 259 

Persons operate equally in all things ad extra, and therefore all 
are equally to be invoked. 

By the word Father, we are put in mind of all God's immense 
benefits, and consequently of that utmost fidelity, reverence, and 
love which we owe to God, and how we ought to strive to please 
Him as our Father. For what can be dearer to a child than a 
father? Or whom ought he to strive more to please? S. 
Cyprian bids us observe “ the wonderful condescension of God, 
who bids us pray in such wise that we should call God our Father, 
and that as Christ is the Son of God, so we also, for whom eternity 
is laid up in store, may call ourselves the sons of God. Hence 
he gathers that “ we ought to remember that when we call God 
our Father, we should act as sons of God, that as we have com- 
placency in God being our Father, so He likewise may have com- 
placency in our being His children. Let us have our conversation 
as temples of God, that it may be evident that God dwelleth in 
us. Nor let our actions be degenerate from our spirit, that we 
who have begun to be celestial and spiritual may think and act 
only after a heavenly and spiritual manner." 

Our . Christ does not here say, My Father. For this expres* 
sion is appropriate to Christ alone, who is the only Son of God 
by nature, says the Gloss. But He says, Our Father, because He 
is speaking in behalf of all, that He may teach that God is the 
Father of all, and that all we are brethren, and ought therefore 
to love one another and pray for one another. “ So/’ says S. 
Cyprian, “ He would that one should pray for all, in such manner 
as He Himself bore all in one/' And the Author Imperfecti 
says, “That prayer is more pleasing to God, not which necessity 
pleads, but which the charity of brotherhood presents." Christ 
willed that each should pray for all, that all might pray for each, 
that every one should have the gain not only of his own prayers, 
but obtain the profit of every one else's prayers. This is 
spiritual interest and usury indeed. 

Which art in heaven . This expression signifies, first, the supreme 
power and dominion of God, that He is both able and willing to 

s 2 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


26o 


WAYS OF HALLOWING 


grant whatever we ask ; that as being Father, he is most good, 
but that He is also most great. 2. It signifies our inheritance, 
which we hope for by reason of our adoption of God our Father, 
and that it is heavenly, not earthly. 3. Christ admonishes us 
that when we pray, we should transfer our thoughts from earth to 
heaven, where God manifests His glory to angels and saints. So 
S. Chrysostom. Therefore when we pray we turn to the east, 
where the sun rises, says S. Augustine, that we may be all 
instructed to turn to God. 

Hallowed be Thy Name. 1. S. Ambrose and S. Chrysostom 
understand by this hallowing, the sanctification of God in our 
Baptism, that having received this sanctification it may remain 
in us. For we have need, says Cyprian, of a daily sanctification, 
that we who sin daily may be daily sanctified. 2. Tertullian 
explains it to mean, make men holy . But by this meaning the first 
petition would become identical with the second, Thy kingdom 
come. More correctly therefore SS. Augustine, Chrysostom, and 
others explain thus : — Grant, O Lord, that not the names of idols, 
or devils, of Mahomet, of Arius, or Luther, or Calvin, but that 
Thy Name may be hallowed among men. 

Moreover, Name may be here understood properly, and figu- 
ratively for the thing named, and this, 1. For the Deity Itself, as 
though He said, “ Let Thy name, i.e., mayest Thou Thyself, O 
Lord our God, be hallowed.” 2. For the honour and glory of 
God, for we pray that these may be had in honour by all men. 
3. For the attributes of God, as His omnipotence, wisdom, justice, 
mercy. And the meaning will be — Grant, O Lord, that men may 
know, worship, and sanctify Thee Thyself, as One in Essence, 
Three in Person, as well as Thine omnipotence, wisdom, &c. 
And so may they celebrate and glorify them continually, both 
with heart and tongue, in life and actions; and not Christians only, 
but Pagans, Jews, and heretics, by having a true faith in Thee, 
and a true love towards Thee, in a word, that Thou shouldst 
convert them to Thyself. 

Note, the Holiness of God is the most sacred majesty, per- 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



THE NAME OF GOD. 


26 l 


fection, Divinity of God, His purity, faithfulness, goodness, and 
other Divine attributes, which the Seraphim behold, rapt as it were 
in an ecstacy, and which they so admire and are amazed at, that 
they sing for ever, “ Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord God of Sabaoth ; 
the whole earth is full of His glory Hence, too, the Blessed 
Virgin, when she had conceived in her mind and her womb the 
Holiness of God, the Eternal Word, cried out in glad amazement, 
“ My soul doth magnify the Lord/’ Ac. “ For He that is mighty 
hath done to me great things, and holy is His Name.” 

When we say, Hallowed be Thy Name , we also desire our own 
sanctification. We cannot sanctify God as He is in Himself, nor 
can we increase His eternal and infinite glory ; but when we 
sanctify God, sanctity is added to, and increases in, ourselves, that 
is to say, holy faith, holy charity, the holy worship of God. By 
these things we are sanctified inwardly, and we hallow God out- 
wardly, because by means of our holiness the holiness of God is 
glorified and made known among men. Lastly, all our own 
hallowing of God is finite and poor; learn therefore that there 
is a twofold way of infinitely hallowing God. The first is, 
“ Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, 
as it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world with- 
out end. Amen.” That is, I ascribe to God that infinite glory 
which He has had from all eternity, that glory with which the 
Father, the Son, and the Spirit perpetually glorify each other 
with Divine and infinite praises. The other way is, when we offer 
Christ crucified to God in the Mass. For Christ, because He is 
God and Man, is a Divine Victim, commensurate with God, and in- 
finite. Iterate then, andconstantly use, both these methods, that thou 
mayest hallow God as He deserves, and as He ought to be 
sanctified and glorified. 

Thy kingdom come . This is the second petition of the Lord's 
Prayer. The kingdom of God is fourfold. 1. It is the empire 
of God over all created things. Of this it is said in Ps. cxlv. 
“Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion 
endureth throughout all ages.” 2. God’s mystical kingdom : by 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


262 


THE KINGDOM OF GOD. 


it, through faith and grace, He reigns in the hearts of the 
Faithful. It is such a kingdom as this, that the devil should cease 
to reign in the world, and that sin should no longer reign in our 
mortal bodies, that S. Ambrose, S. Jerome, and Euthymius think 
is here meant. Hear S. Ambrose (lib. 6 de Sacrament . c. 5): 
“ The petition is, that the kingdom of Christ may be in us. If 
God reign in us, the adversary can have no place in us. Fault, 
or sin reigns not, but virtue reigns, modesty and devotion 
reign.” 

3. The kingdom of God is in heaven, in which He happily and 
gloriously reigns among the Blessed. This is what Tertullian 
and S. Cyprian here understand. “Well indeed,” says the 
latter, “do we pray for the kingdom of God, that is, the heavenly 
kingdom, because there is also an earthly kingdom, feut he who 
has renounced the world is already greater than its honours and 
its kingdoms ; and thus he who dedicates himself to God and to 
Christ desires not earthly but heavenly kingdoms.” 

4. That is the kingdom of God, most perfect and complete, in 
which, after the kingdom of the devil, after sin and death have 
been altogether conquered and destroyed, God alone shall per- 
fectly rule over both His friends — that is, the saints — and His 
enemies, t\e, the impious and the reprobate. And this shall be at 
the Resurrection and the Day of Judgment, of ^hich I Cor. xv. 
28. This is the best way of understanding this petition ; for, as 
I said, these three first petitions are concerned directly only with 
God's honour and glory, and with ours only as a consequence. 
The meaning, then, is this — We pray, O Lord, that Thou mayest 

eign wholly, and without any adversary, that all creatures what- 
soever may be wholly subject unto Thee. Hence, also, we ask, as 
a consequence, for ourselves, that we may be speedily translated 
from this world, as from a wearisome pilgrimage and a perilous 
warfare, to the kingdom of everlasting glory and happiness, that 
we may reign with Christ and His saints for ever. For then shall 
God wholly reign in us, and we in God, according to these words 
of the Apocalypse, “ Thou hast made us to our God a kingdom 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



TWOFOLD WILL OF GOD. 263 

and priests, and we shall reign upon the earth.” For then shall 
'*God be all in all." (i Cor. xv. 28.) 

Thy will he done , &c. This is the third petition, although Ter- 
tullian {lib. de Orat.) places it second, and the third, Thy kingdom 
come. This petition, also, has respect to God and God’s kingdom, 
because the more God’s will is done, the more God’s kingdom is 
extended. For the great honour of God, the great empire of God, 
is that all men and all things should be subject to His will, and 
that it should be fulfilled in all. Now the will of God is twofold. 
The will of well-pleasing, and the will of signification, or absolute 
and optative will. The will of well-pleasing in God is that with 
which God absolutely wills a thing to be done, which will is 
always fulfilled, and which nothing can hinder or delay, according 
to the words of Ps. cxxxv., “ Whatsoever the Lord pleased (; voluil, 
Vulg.) that did he in heaven and earth.’’ And in Is. xlvi., “All 
my counsel shall stand, and all my will shall be done.’’ (Vulg.) 
In this will we must acquiesce, either by rejoicing at it, or by sub- 
mitting to the adversity which it may bring upon us. 

The will of signification is that by which God signifies that He 
wishes His laws and precepts, which He has imposed upon us, to 
be done by us. All the Fathers understand this petition to speak 
of this second will. The words, therefore, do not apply directly 
to God’s will of efficacy and good pleasure , for it cannot but be 
fulfilled, but to that desiring and commanding will of God which 
theologians call significative. The meaning, then, is — “Grant, O 
Lord, unto us Thine abundant and efficacious grace, that, by 
means of it, all men may, both in doing Thy behests and in 
suffering what Thou wiliest, obey thy will with as much alacrity 
and concord as the angels obey it in heaven. So S. Jerome, 
Chrysostom, Theophylact, &c. Christ seems here to allude to the 
words of Ps. ciii. 20, 21, “Bless the Lord, all ye angels of his, 
ye that excel in strength, doing his will, and hearing the voice 
of his words. Bless the Lord, all his virtues, which do his will.” 
(Vulg.) We ought, therefore, to imitate the promptitude, swiftness, 
and perfection of the angels in fulfilling the will of God, that we 


Digitized by C^ooQle 



264 


ABSOLUTE WILL. 


may venerate and honour it, and in so doing* we shall do good to 
ourselves. For, as the Apostle says (1 Thess. iv.), “ This is the 
will of God, even your sanctification.” 

Note 1. — The optative will of God which is termed significative . 
First, as commanding, by which He commands, or forbids some- 
thing to be done. This we are always bound to fulfil. The other, 
persuading and counselling, by which He counsels us to embrace 
a state of poverty, or virginity, or a state of perfection, Ac. This 
we are not bound to fulfil absolutely; for we may decline on 
account of some special honest cause, as, for example, infirmity, 
temptation, the duty of succouring our parents, or the State — 
something which God has only counselled generally. The reason 

is, that God neither wills with an absolute will that which He only 
counsels, nor does He will to bind me to this particular thing. 
Hence I am not bound to fulfil it. But it is otherwise with respect 
to God’s will of commanding . 

Note 2. — Our will ought to be conformed to the Divine will. 
First, effectively , because that our will may be good, it ought to 
will that which God wishes it to will — that, namely, which the law 
of God wishes it to will and do. For our will ought to submit itself 
to the Divine law and will, as creating and ordering all things. 

2. Objectively : Our will ought to consent to the Divine will, as 
to its formal object, or as to the reason of willing. That ours 
may be a right will it ought to will that which is good and con- 
formable to right reason, and, therefore, to the Divine will. For 
the Divine will wills that which right reason declares ought to be 
done. For the eternal Law which is in the mind and will of God 
is the norm and the rule of all goodness and all virtue. 

3. Our will, in order to be good, is not bound always to con- 
form itself, with respect to the material object or thing willed, 
even when this is known, to the Divine. This is plain from 
examples of Holy Scripture. For God willed Sodom to be over- 
thrown ; but Abraham, as far as he was concerned, wished it not 
to be, wherefore he prayed to the Lord that He would not destroy 

it. God willed that the infant which was born to David of 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



OPTATIVE WILL. 


26 S 


adultery should die. David was intensely grieved that it should 
•die. God willed that Christ should not come in the flesh until 
4,000 years had elapsed. The prophets desired that Christ should 
•come quickly. God willed to forsake the Jewish nation, and to 
transfer His beneficences to the Gentiles. But Paul was so 
grieved at this that he wished to be anathema from Christ to avert 
it. In fine, this is so true, that God can command me to will 
something which He Himself willeth not. Thus He commanded 
Abraham to will to slay his son, whom, nevertheless, God willed not 
to be slain. The reason is that what God willeth may be incon- 
venient and troublesome to man. For, as S. Augustine says, 
one thing is suitable for man, another thing for God ( Enchirid . 101). 
Whence, so far as it is troublesome, a man may will it not, and 
grieve over it. But this affection will be in accord with the Divine 
will in general. For piety and charity dictate that it is right that 
■we should desire our own safety and that of our friends, and that 
we should, as far as we can, procure it. But if we perceive after- 
wards that it is the absolute will of God that this should not be, 
we must not fight against it, nor murmur at it, but rather submit 
faumbly to it, and acquiesce in it, and say with Christ in the 
garden, “ Not My will, but Thine be done." For that first will 
•of ours, differing from God's will, as respects the thing willed, is 
wishing (velleitas) rather than absolute will. Wherefore, it always 
includes this condition, expressed or implied, “ if it so please 
■God.” 

Hence it follows further that we are not bound to will those 
•things which happen by God’s permission only ; indeed, there are 
some things which we ought not to will, as sins, for neither does God 
in any manner will these. And some other tilings which are not 
sins we are not bound to will : we may wish them not to happen, 
and with all our might strive against them, such are slaughters, the 
destruction of cities. Yet even in such things as these it seems 
best to say with the Psalmist, “Just art thou, O Lord, and right is 
<hy judgment." (Vulg.) Wherefore it is better, for the most 
ipart, to consider that these things are permitted by the just 


Digitized by CjOOQle 


26 6 


VISION OK S. CHRISTINA. 


judgment of God for His glory, and to acquiesce in the Divine 
dispensation, rather than to vex ourselves by grieving too much 
over them. 

We can, therefore, be unwilling that such things should happen, 
so far as evils spring from them, and yet will them so far as 
God wills them to be for the just punishment of sins. For this 
is God's absolute will, which is called of God's good pleasure, to- 
which we ought to consent by rejoicing in good things, and by 
suffering without murmuring in evil things, as when God chastises 
us with famine, or pestilence, or war. As Maldonatus says, “We 
ask that the will of God may be done in us, as well as by us ; for 
it is of greater importance that the very least part of the will of 
God should be done than every good of a creature, qud creature, 
should befall. And S. Cyprian (Tract, de Mortalitate ) y when he was 
exhorting his people to bear patiently the pestilence which was at 
that time devastating the province, says, “ We should remember 
that we ought to do not our own will but God's, according to what 
the Lord has bid us daily pray." 

That is a notable thing which we read in the Life of S. Christina 
( apud Surium , Jim . 23). On the same day on which Jerusalem 
and the Cross and Sepulchre of Christ were captured by Saladin 
and the Saracens, she, who was then in Belgium, knew what had 
happened by revelation from God, and yet she rejoiced in spirit. 
When asked why she rejoiced, she answered thus : “ Christ hath 
decreed, that for the indignity done to Him that land should be 
subject to this ignominy, although it was sanctified by His 
Passion ; yet it shall return with Him in the end of the world, 
when, for the sake of recovering that soul which is to live for ever, 
and which was redeemed with His blood, men shall be turned 
from iniquity to a zeal for righteousness, and shall shed their own 
blood, and shall, as it were, recompense the death of the Saviour 
with great devotion." 

To this we may add that infidels relatively live better and 
offend God less than professing Christians who know God better, 
and have received greater benefits from Him. Wherefore the 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



HIEROGLYPHIC OF PRAYER. 


267 


Holy Land was given up by God to Saladin and the Saracens on 
account of the multitude of the enormities which the Christians 
committed who inhabited it, such as not even the Turks are 
wont to commit. These enormities are graphically described 
by Marinus Sanutus, in his work entitled The Secret Cross of 
Christians . 

Lastly, R. Gamaliel ( inPirk s Avoth, c. 2) well says, “ Make God's 
will altogether thine own will ; yea, leave thine own to fulfil 
His. For thus will God make the will of others concordant with 
thine." This is the congruous reward of obedience, that like as we 
obey the Divine will, so will others obey and consent to our will. 

As in heaven , so in earth. " He bids us who have our conversation 
here below have fellowship with the inhabitants of heaven ; and 
He would that before we come to that habitation above, we should 
make earth another heaven." 

The hieroglyphic of prayer is a golden chain let down from 
heaven with the motto, Thus are we drawn to the stars. Homer 
feigned that a golden chain was let down from heaven by Jupiter, 
that the rest of the gods who were living upon earth might attach 
themselves to it and drag him out of heaven. They, endeavouring 
to do this with all their might, were by it, beyond their expec- 
tation, drawn up as by a ladder into heaven. This is the symbol 
of prayer, for prayer is the ascension of the mind to God ; and 
D. Dionysius affirms it to be the golden chain by which we draw 
God Himself to us, and draw ourselves to Him, when we submit 
our will to His most just and infallible will. And this is the great 
result of our prayers ; and this Christ Himself has expressed for 
us in these words of the Lord's Prayer, Thy will he done in earth , as 
it is in heaven. 

Mystically , S. Cyprian by heaven understands the righteous, and 
by earth , sinners : Grant, O Lord, that sinners may do Thy will 
as the righteous do it. 

Second. — S. Augustine by heaven understands Christ, who 
descended from heaven to earth, that He might espouse earth, i.e. 9 
the Church on earth to Himself by the Incarnation ; as though He 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


268 


RESIGNATION OP S. GERTRUDE. 


had said, Grant, O Lord, that like as Christ doeth Thy will in all 
things, so also the Church may do it ; for she is the Spouse of 
Christ, whom it behoveth to be in all things conformed to her 
Bridegroom. 

Moraliter \ The sanctity, rest, joy, and perfection of a Christian 
consist in denial of his own will and conformity with the will of 
God. As S. Bernard says ( Serm . 28 in Can/.), “This conformity 
marries the soul to the Word." 

S. Gertrude was wont to repeat these words, Thy will he done , 
three hundred and sixty- five times a day with the greatest devo- 
tion, and she perceived that this was a sacrifice most pleasing to 
God. Once, when she was told by God to make a choice of 
either health or sickness, she replied, “I most fervently desire 
that Thou wouldst not do my will but Thine." And by this means 
she abode in the deepest peace and joy. For he who knows that 
he possesses all things in God, and counts all other things as 
nothing, and considers God’s will as the best, and rests wholly in 
it, is able to say with the Psalmist, “I will lay me down in peace 
and take my rest; " and with S. Augustine (lib. 1 Con/ess., c. 1), 
“ Thou, O Lord, has made us for Thyself, and our heart is restless 
until it resteth in Thee." There is extant a short but famous 
dialogue of S. Catherine of Sienna upon this subject, in which she 
teaches that the utmost peace and perfection consist in conformity 
to the Divine Will ; that a man should plainly and wholly resign 
to that Will not only his own will but all that he is or has, and 
should say everywhere and always in every event whatsoever. 
Thy will he done. S. Catherine had fashioned an abode in her 
heart, with chambers tabulated according to the Divine Will ; and 
in it she was wont to dwell most happily and holily. In it she 
shut herself up, so that she thought nothing, said and did nothing, 
save what she believed would be pleasing to the Will of God. 
And therefore the Holy Spirit was wont to teach her whatever 
ought to be done ; for she had heard from God, “ Believe, My 
daughter, that thy God is better able to know and will what is for 
thy good than thou art; and therefore to order and direct all 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



SUPERS UBSTAN TI AL. 


269 


things, prosperous and adverse, for thy good, far more surely 
than any father and mother care for, and procure benefits for, an 
only child ” 

Give us this day our supersubstantial (many MSS. read daily) bread . 
This is the fourth petition, in which we begin to ask for the things 
which concern ourselves. S. Chrysostom connects this petition with 
the one preceding — thus : “ I, Christ, bid you ask that the will of 
God may be done by you, as it is done by the angels. I do not, 
however, equal you to the angels, for ye have need of bread; but 
they require it not, for they are immortal and impassible, ye are 
mortal and fragile.” Hence Ruperti (lib. 17, in Gen . 25) concludes 
that all men, even princes and kings, are beggars from God. For 
as God fed the children of Israel for forty years in the wilderness, 
by raining down manna upon them from heaven, so every day, 
when we sit at table, God as it were rains food upon each of us 
from above. Hence David says, “ I am a beggar and poor. The 
Lord careth for me.” (Ps. xl. 17, Vulg.) “Let us all/' says 
Ruperti, “say as mendicants before the doors of Divine grace, 
Give us this day our daily bread." Hear S. Augustine : “ A beggar 
asks of thee, and thou art God's beggar. For we all, when we 
pray, are God's beggars; we stand at the door of the great 
Father of the family, yea we prostrate ourselves, we groan as 
suppliants, wishing to receive something, and that very something 
is God Himself. What doth a beggar ask of thee ? Bread. And 
what dost thou ask of God but Christ, who saith, ‘I am the living 
Bread which came down from heaven V " 

Supersubstantial . You ask what is supersubstantial bread ? I reply 
the Greek is brwvatov, which is found only here and in S. Luke 
xi. 3. 1. Angelus Caninius (lib. de Nom. Heb. N. Test.) translates 

to-morrow's bread , for brunxna rjfiepa is often put for the following 
day. He would paraphrase the petition thus, “ As on the day of 
preparation, or Friday, the Hebrews in the wilderness collected 
manna for the Sabbath, on which day they were to rest, so do 
Thou, O Lord, give us this day bread for to-morrow, for we are 
not solicitous for anything beyond, but after to-morrow we await, 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



270 


DAILY BREAD 


and as it were prepare ourselves for the Lord's Resurrection, and 
the eternal Jubilee. Therefore, we collect our baggage, and only 
ask for bread for to-morrow. It is in favour of this that S. Jerome 
writes that the Hebrew Gospel of the Nazarenes reads ino machar , 
i.e. “for to-morrow." Whence S. Athanasius ( Tract . de Incam . 
Verb.) thinks that we here ask for the Holy Spirit, who is the 
Divine Bread, whom we hope to feed upon and enjoy in Heaven, 
and whose first-fruits we receive and taste in the Eucharist. 

2. S. Jerome explains art ovcrtov by ireptownov, that is principal , 
glorious , excellent . Symmachus translates elect, or that which is 
above all substances, and is superior to all creatures. So also 
Cassian ( Collat . 9. 20), Cyril (Cat. Mystag . 5), and S. Ambrose 
(lib. 5, de Sacrament, c. 4), who by this bread understands the 
Eucharist, which in Zech. ix. is called “the com of the elect." 
(Vulg.) 

3. Literally, hriovarux, means that which pertains to substance , say 
substantial , essential , that which is for the preservation of man’s life 
and substance, as often as is necessary. So S. Chrysostom, Theo- 
phylact, and S. Basil, as well as many others, who with Suidas 
interpret hrwwruov, as hrt ttjv rjpury ovaCav koI rpo<fnjv brapKovnu, 
or that which is congruous to, and suffices for, our substance 
and nutrition, that which subserves, not pleasure but necessity, 
that which is not too delicate or abundant but frugal and 
moderate, i.e. daily. Hence the Syriac has the bread of our need; 
Arabic, bread sufficient. So, also the Egyptian, Ethiopic, and 
Persian versions. So also the Fathers who lived before S. Jerome's 
version, such as SS. Cyprian, Ambrose, Augustine, translate daily 
bread. And the Church in the Breviary and Missal uses the 
same ancient translation, and teaches the faithful to pray, Give us 
this day our daily bread. 

S. Jerome, who, at the bidding of Pope Damasus, corrected the 
Latin version of the New Testament, in accordance with the Greek, 
in this place substituted supersubstantial for daily, to bring the 
passage into accord with the Greek. 

This supersubstantial. or daily bread , is a parallel expression to 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



MAY MEAN THE EUCHARIST. 


271 


the Hebrew DV 121 davar yom, “the thing, or matter of a day." 
For Christ forbids us to be anxious about the morrow, in which it is 
uncertain whether or not we shall be alive. “He would," says S. 
Chrysostom, “ that we should be always girded, and provided, as it 
were, with wings of faith, by which we may fly heavenward, and 
give no greater indulgence to nature than necessary use demands." 
Again, S. Jerome’s reason for translating briowriov literally, by 
supersubstanticd, was to indicate that in this petition we ask above 
all for heavenly bread, such as we receive in the Eucharist. 

2. You ask what is this special supersubstanticd, or daily bread. 
Calvin (lib. 3, Instit. c. 20, 44), and Philip Melancthon, in his 
Commonplaces , tit. de Invocat ., understand it of corporeal food only. 
Some Catholics understand it to mean only spiritual food. Cer- 
tainly SS. Jerome, Cyril, Ambrose, Cassian, speak expressly of 
this alone, in the passages about to be cited. But I say that 
this bread is both material, for the sustenance of the body, and 
spiritual and heavenly bread, suitable for the nourishment of the 
soul, such as the word of God and the Eucharist. We have need 
of both, and therefore we ought to ask for both, and for the latter 
so much more earnestly than the former, as the soul is superior to 
the body. And this is denoted by the word supersubstanticd , which 
S. Jerome explains to mean superexcellent , surpassing all created 
substances, because, as Cassian says, “the sublimity of its 
magnificence and its sanctity is superior to that of the whole 
creation." And for this reason, in the Greek, the definite article is 
added, doubled in truth, rov aprov rov brunxriov, the bread the supersub 
stantial . As though it were said, “ Give us bread not common, 
but celestial and divine." Christ alludes to the manna given to 
the Hebrews, which was a type of the Eucharist For of manna, 
it is said in Ps. lxxviii. 24, “ He gave them bread from heaven." 
“ Man did eat angels’ food." Thus, therefore, manna was food 
hriovo-ios, ije. heavenly and angelic ; but much more is the 
Eucharist. Whence in Wisd. xix. 20, both are called in Greek 
Ambrosia, which is said by the poets to be the food of the gods. 
S. Ambrose calls the Eucharist this supersubstantial bread. “It" 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



272 


THE BREAD 07 LIPE. 


he says, " this be daily bread, why do you receive it only once 
a year ? So live that you may be fit to receive it daily." Thus 
the first Christians were accustomed to communicate daily, as 
is plain from Acts ii. 46. And S. Cyprian (de Oral . Domini } 
says, “ We ask that this bread may be daily given us, lest we. 
who are in Christ, and daily receive the food of the Eucharist, 
by the intervention of some grave fault, by abstaining and not 
communicating, should be kept back from the heavenly Bread, 
and separated from the Body of Christ, when He Himself has 
admonished us saying, ‘ I am the Bread of life, Who came down 
rom Heaven. If any man shall eat of My Bread he shall live 
for ever.' " (S. John vi.) 

Note that under the term bread , by a Hebraism, whatsoever is 
necessary for food, clothing, habitation, and the life both of the 
body and the soul, is sought for. “ We ask for a sufficiency," 
says S. Augustine ( Epist . 12 1). “By the word bread we mean 
everything." 

And forgive , &c. Thus far in these petitions there has been sup- 
plication for good things; the last three petitions are depreca- 
tions against evil. Debts , S. Luke (xi. 4) interprets by dfuipnas, 
t\e., sins; for sin is the greatest debt for the greatest injury, a 
debt which God exacts. And because this debt is infinite, neither 
man nor angel can make satisfaction to the rigour of justice, but 
only Christ, who is God and Man. These debts therefore are 
sins , which incur the punishment of hell. The sinful man pawns 
his soul to the demon, to death and hell ; but to God he owes a 
hundred, yea an infinite number of souls, if he had them, and 
deaths in hell if he were able to bear them. 

Hence the Fathers prove against the Pelagians that no one is 
without sin. The Pelagians asserted that the righteous pray, 
Forgive us our debts , not for themselves, but for others who have 
sinned ; or if they do say it for themselves, they say it out of 
humility. S. Augustine confutes both these errors (lib. 2 de 
Peccat . Mentis, c. 10; and lib. 2 contra Epistolam Parmen., c 10.) For 
we say not. Forgive the debts of others , but, Forgive us our debts." 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



HOW WE MUST FORGIVE. 


*73 


In fine, the Council of Milev. (2. c. 1) pronounces an anathema 
upon those who pretend that Forgive us our debts is said by the 
saints not truly, but out of humility. “ For who,” it asks, “ could 
endure that in prayer a man should lie not to men, but to God ; 
that he should ask with his lips that his own debts should be 
forgiven, and should mean in his heart that he has no d$bts to be 
forgiven ?” 

As we forgive, &c. Debts , that is, not of money, nor of restitution 
of fame, or honour, but of injuries done to us, that we should not 
follow them up with hatred, nor the wish for private vengeance, 
nor even for public punishment, unless the public welfare, or right 
reason require it. The word as does not denote the measure, 
or the rule which God follows in the forgiveness of sins: for 
we ought to pray that more may be forgiven us by God than 
others owe us — but the inductive cause which may move God 
to forgive, whence Luke says, Forgive us our debts , since we also 
forgive those who are indebted to us. This is the condition which 
God requires of us, and if it be fulfilled, He readily forgives, 
and if it be not fulfilled, He will not forgive, according to that 
which follows, For if ye forgive men their offences, your Father which is 
in heaven will forgive you, but if, &c. Wherefore S. Cyprian says, 
that to refuse to forgive is a sin so great that it cannot be blotted 
out by martyrdom. Thus we read that Sapritius fell from martyr- 
dom, when he was all but holding his crown in his hands. For 
when he was about to be beheaded for his constancy in the faith, 
and was told to kneel down, he refused. This was because he 
would not forgive one Nicephorus, who had offended him, and 
who prayed him to pardon him. Nicephorus immediately put 
himself in the place of Sapritius, and thus obtained the palm 
which the other lost. Thus “the life of the saints is the inter- 
pretation of Scripture,” as S. Jerome says. Wherefore S. John 
the Almsgiver brought an angry prince to reconciliation by 
celebrating mass in his presence ; and as he was saying, For- 
give us our debts, straightway he was silent on purpose ; but the 
prince proceeded, as we forgive our debtors . Then the patriarch 

T 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



274 


OX TEMPTATION. 


turned to him, and said, “Take heed what you say to God in 
such an awful hour as this, As I forgive , so do Thou forgive me. At 
this admonition the prince was struck as by a thunderbolt, and 
replied, “ Whatsoever Thou, Lord, shalt bid, that will Thy servant 
do/' And immediately he became reconciled to his enemy. 

They therefore who are unwilling to forgive injuries, lie before 
God, and tacitly condemn themselves, and show that they are 
unworthy of His forgiveness. Let us add that these words have 
been laid down by Christ as a formula of prayer, that by them 
we should be admonished to forgive those who trespass against 
us. We forgive , i.e., as we ought and wish to forgive, but as our 
infirmity is not sufficent for this, do Thou, O Lord, give strength, 
and change our heart that we may be able to do it. 

And lead us not, &c. Lead, not impel, as Calvin would interpret. 
For “God cannot be tempted of evil, neither tempteth he any 
man," saith S. James (i. 13). God only permits us to be led into 
temptation. So the Fathers and all Catholics. In a manner, God 
is said to do what He permits, since nothing can be done without 
His suffering it to be. The meaning then is — 1. Permit us not to 
be led into temptation in such a manner, at least, that we are 
overcome by it, as fishes and birds are taken in a net. “ Let us 
not, " as S. Augustine says, “ be bereft of Thy help, so that we 
should be deceived and consent to any temptation." 

2. Suffer not temptation to befall us. And yet in the Lives of 
the Fathers , we read, that certain saints wished for temptations 
as a means of increasing virtue, through fortitude of mind and 
trust in God. Whence S. James says, “ My brethren count it all 
joy when ye fall into divers temptations." For by temptation we 
are proved and exercised, we fight and are perfected. Christ 
therefore puts us in mind of our infirmity, and that because of it, 
we ought not to expose ourselves to temptations ; but should, as 
far as may be, ward them off, and pray against them. And we 
can only overcome temptation by the help of God’s grace. 
Wherefore in temptation we must continually and ardently pray 
for God’s help. As S. Peter Chrysologus says, ( Scrm . 44), “ He 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



SATAN IS THE EVIL ONI. 


275 


goes into temptation, who goes not to prayer/' And S. Gregory 
Nyssen says (Ora/. I de Ora t. Domini), “If prayer precede business, 
sin findeth no way of access to the mind." 

But deliver us from evil . That is, from temptation , for of temptation 
the preceding petition speaks. 2. From the devil t who is the president 
and artificer of temptation. Thus Tertullian and S. Chrysostom. 
He is called in Greek 6 irovrjpbs, the evil, or malignant one. As it is 
said (1 John v.), “That wicked one toucheth him not." And, “Ye 
have overcome the wicked one." For the devil tempts all by 
means of wicked men, the world, and the flesh. 3. More fully, 
S. Cyprian understands every evil to be intended here, everything 
which either incites to sin, or is a hindrance to virtue. And thus 
there is a clear distinction between this petition, the last and 
seventh, from the one which precedes it. Hear S. Cyprian: 
“When we say, Deliver us from evil , nothing remains, which we 
need ask for further : when once we ask for the protection of 
God against evil, and obtain it, we stand secure against every- 
thing which the devil or the world can do. For what dread of 
the world can there be to any one whose protector is God in 
heaven ? " 

Amen. This, says S. Jerome, is the seal of the Lord's Prayer, 
approving and wishing that thus it may be. 

Observe in the Greek MSS. is added, For thine is the kingdom , , the 
power and the glory for ever. Amen. So also read the Syriac, 
Chrysostom, Theophylact, Euthymius. But the Greeks seem to 
have added this by a pious custom, similar to that by which they 
add to the angelic salutation, For thou hast brought forth our 
Saviour , or to the Psalms the Gloria Pairi. The Codex Vaticanus 
omits this doxology: and among the Latins, Tertullian, Cyprian, 
Jerome, Augustine, and Ambrose. 

In the Bibliotheca Patrum , tom. 5, there is a paraphase of the 
Lord's Prayer composed by S. Francis, partly literal, partly mys- 
tical, which is so sublime, wise, and fervent, that I have thought 
it well to append it in this place. 

“ Our Father : O most holy Creator, our Redeemer, our 

t 2 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



276 PARAPHRASE OF S. FRANCIS. 

Saviour, our Comforter. Which art in Heaven } in the angels, in 
the saints, illuminating them with the knowledge of Thyself, for 
Thou, O Lord, art Light, inflaming them with Thy Divine love; 
for Thou, Lord, art love, dwelling in them and filling them with 
blessing; for Thou, O Lord, art the chief and everlasting good, 
from whom are all, and without whom is no good. Hallowed he 
Thy name : that we may have a clear knowledge of Thee, that we 
may know the breadth of Thy kindness, the length of Thy 
promises, the height of Thy majesty, and the depth of Thy judg- 
ments. Thy kingdom come: that Thou mayest reign in us by Thy 
grace, and make us to come to Thy kingdom, where there is the 
open vision of Thee/ and where Thy love is perfected, and where 
Thy company and the fruition of Thee are everlasting : that we 
may love Thee with all our heart, by ever meditating upon Thee, 
by always desiring Thee with all our soul, by directing all our 
intentions to Thee, and by seeking Thy honour in all things, and 
by obediently corresponding to Thy love with all our strength, 
and with all the faculties of our souls and bodies, and by loving 
our neighbours as ourselves, by drawing all men unto Thy love 
with all our might, by rejoicing in others' prosperity as though it 
were our own, and suffering with them in adversity, and by giving 
no offence to any one. Give us this diy our daily bread: give us 
this day Thy beloved Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, in memory, in 
understanding, in reverence for the love which He had towards us, 
and of the things which He has done, spoken, and suffered for us. 
And forgive us our debts , through Thy mercy, and the unspeakable 
virtue of the Passion of Thy well-beloved Son, our Lord Jesus 
Christ, and the merits and the intercessions of the Blessed Virgin 
Mary and all the elect. As we forgive them that trespass against us: 
and because we do not fully forgive, do Thou, O Lord, cause us 
perfectly to forgive, that we may love our enemies as ourselves, 
and devoutly intercede for them, that we may render evil for evil 
unto no man, but strive to be profitable unto all in Thee. And lead 
us not into temptation : either secret or open, sudden or habitual. 
But deliver us from evil : past, present, and to come. Amen, freely 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


HOW TO FAST. 277 

and spontaneously/' Thus was S. Francis accustomed to say, 
Our Father , at all the hours. 

For if ye forgive men their trespasses (Gr. a/iapru is, sins, i.e., offences 
against you) . * . will also forgive you. I£ that is, ye fulfil the 

other things which are required, viz., contrition and confession. 

The Gloss has, “ God has placed it in our power, either to 
provoke His judgment against us or to make His sentence merciful. 
This only does the Judge require of us, that such as we would 
that He should be to us, we should show ourselves to our 
brethren." 

Moreover, ; when ye fast , &c. Christ has taught the way to pray, 
He now teaches how to fast, because prayer without fasting is 
weak, as S. Chrysostom says. He teaches that it should be in 
earnest, and in secret, not with the object of pleasing men but 
God. For sad , the Greek has aKvOpwrrol, i.e., with a severe an t 
lowering countenance , which is in opposition to being iXapol, or 
pleasant and joyful ; aKvOpwwol is derived from <ncu9pol sad, dis- 
agreeable, and wvra the face . 

Disfigure, Gr. d</>avt£owi, which S. Jerome translates by demo- 
liuntur , S. Hilary by conficiunt , and S. Chrysostom by corrupt; 
others better, obscure their faces , i.e., by affecting, putting on severity, 
pallor, sadness of countenance. Others translate labefactant, 
obliterant , perdunt, and velut e medio tollunt : i.e., make their face as it 
were not to appear, which the Vulgate represents by exterminate . 
For d</xu'i£€U' is, to make to vanish, to take the face out of sight, as 
those who use varnish; such are they who by a pretended 
emaciation and sorrowful pallor feign sanctity. Such are hypo- 
crites, as the Scribes were. Hear S. Jerome, “Exiles exterminantur, 
who are sent away extra ierminos, beyond the boundaries of their 
country." Then he explains exterminate by demoliuntur. “The 
hypocrite demolishes his countenance that he may feign sadness : 
and when perchance his mind is joyful he m^y carry grief in his 
face." 

But thou • • . Father in secret . Who hides His essence and 
His majesty, and who is as much in secret as in public places, and 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



27 « 


EASTERN CUSTOMS. 


who sees as clearly the hidden things of the heart as the manifest 
things of our works. 

It was a practice with the inhabitants of Palestine, in common 
with other Orientals, on holy days and other joyful occasions, 
especially at feasts, to anoint and wash the face, both for purposes 
of refreshment, for beauty, and for a sweet smell. Palestine being 
a very hot country the climate occasions profuse perspiration. 
They wash the face then to wipe atoay the perspiration, and 
anoint to banish unpleasant odours. This is clear from Ruth iii. 3, 
Judith x. 3, 2 Sam. xii. 20, Luke vii. 46. When the Magdalene 
anointed Christ the house was filled with the odour of the oint- 
ment. (John xii. 3.) Therefore in times of affliction and mourning 
they abstained from anointing and washing. 

Observe here a catachresis, similar to that in chap. iii. 6, and 
elsewhere. For Christ does not here command any actual 
anointing, but joyfulness and the putting away all outward signs 
of fasting. Anoint thine head ’ be joyful, and present the 
appearance of hilarity, as though thou wert anointed with oil, 
which is the symbol and the cause of gladness, according to the 
words “That he may make his face joyful with oil.” (Ps. civ. 15 ) 
Yea, that thou shouldst so conceal thy fasting, as to put on the 
symbol of feasting, namely, anointing and washing. Thus S. 
Jerome. With this agrees that golden saying of S. Syncletica, 
preserved in the Lives of the Faihers ) “Asa treasure manifested 
is quickly spent, so virtue which is made known, or becomes public, 
is destroyed. For as wax melteth at the face of the fire, so does a 
soul become worthless by praise, and lose the vigour of its 
virtues." 

Lay not up, &c. Gr. Treasure not for yourselves treasures . Christ 
here shows which are the true riches, and which the false — the 
true, heavenly ; the false, earthly. Note the three modes of cor- 
ruption. The moth corrupts garments; rust, gold and silver; 
thieves steal all other things. 

Christ here calls men away from the desire of riches by three 
considerations. 1. Because they are fleeting and corruptible. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



THE LIGHT OF THE BODY. 


279 


2. Because they darken the mind. 3. Because they draw the 
whole mind to themselves, so that it cannot serve God, for no one 
is able to serve two masters such as God and mammon. 

But lay up for yourselves, not for children or grandchildren, not 
for ungrateful heirs, but for yourselves, t\e., for your soul. “What 
folly/* says S. Chrysostom, " to leave your treasures in the place 
from whence ye are going away, instead of sending them before 
you whither ye are going/* Further on he says, “ If you should 
wish to behold the heart of a man who loveth gold, you will find 
it like a garment that is being eaten away by ten thousand worms, 
for you will find it perforated by cares on every side, putrefying 
with sins, full of corruption. But not like this is the soul of the 
man who is voluntarily poor. Rather, it doth shine like gold, it is 
resplendent like jewels, it blossoms like the rose. There is no 
moth there, no thief, no anxiety about the things of this life, but 
like the angels, so it liveth. It is not subject to the devils, it doth 
not stand beside the king, but it standeth near to God. Its war- 
fare is not with men, but with angels. It hath no need of servants, 
rather doth it subject the passions unto it as its servants. What 
can be more noble than such a poor man as this ? Be it that he 
hath not horses and a chariot. But what need hath he of them, 
who shall be borne above the clouds to be with Christ ?” 

For where , &c. Your treasure , i.e., what thou valuest, what thou 
lovest and delightest in, what is the dearest to thee of all things, 
on which thou spendest thy time and thoughts. 

Dost thou wish to know what is thy treasure, what thou lovest 
and valuest ? Consider what thou most often hast in thy mind. 
If thou thinkest most frequently of heavenly things, then thou 
lovest heaven ; but if of earthly things, then thy treasure is on 
earth. Like a mole, thou buriest thy heart in the earth. 

The light of the body , &c. Those who have bad sight, says S. 
Jerome, see many lamps instead of one. A single and clear eye 
beholds things simply and purely as they are. 

But if thine eye be evil \ &c. A single eye is one that is sound, 
and free from humours which affect and disturb the sight Thy 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



280 


THI EYE IS THE INTENTION. 


whole body will be luminous , as though it be full of eyes; because 
the light of the eye going before will direct all thine actions in the 
right way. But if thine ye be evil , Gr. votnqpo v, i.e., badly affected, 
and full of vitiated humours, thy whole body will be dark , because it 
will lack light and a guide, i.e., the illumination and guidance of 
thine eye. If therefore the light (of thine eye) that is in thee be 
darkness , how great is the darkness / For the rest of the body which 
is naturally dark, since it has no light except from the eyes, if it 
be deprived of them, how dark must it be ! How will it go astray, 
and grope in blindness. “ What blackness of darkness will there 
be in thee!” says S. Hilary. 

These words are a parable, like several others of the sayings of 
Christ in this sermon. By the eye we may understand with SS. 
Jerome, Chrysostom, Jansen, Maldonatus, Toletus, and others, the 
mind or understanding. For what the eye is to the body the under- 
standing is to the mind. As the eye directs the body, so does the 
practical understanding direct the mind. Whence the error and 
fault of the soul springs in action from the error and fault of the 
understanding, and this again frequently arises from depraved 
inclinations and covetous desires. For what the desire lusteth 
after, that the understanding affecteth, so that it judgeth it to be 
good and sought after. This has to do with what He has 
spoken a little before : Where thy treasure is, there will thy heart be 
also. He here explains what He means by the heart — calling it 
the eye of the mind — i.e., the practical understanding, which goes 
before and directs all our actions by its light. Christ wishes to 
teach that the mind cannot be right and pure, nor consequently 
the actions which flow from it be pure where the heart is blinded 
by avarice and cupidity. 

2. We may w'ith S. Augustine and S. Gregory (lib. 28 Moral, 
c. 6), and Bede, understand by the eye the intention of the mind. 
For this moves, rules, and bends the mind and the understanding 
whithersoever it will. If it be directed purely to God and divine 
things as its end and aim, it will cause that the work originating 
m the mind shall be altogether pure and holy. But if the intention 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



DERIVATION OB MAMMON. 


28 l 

be depraved and impure, it will make the work flowing from it, 
even if it be a good work, become impure, evil, and vitiated. For 
in the whole chapter, from the first verse, Christ demands a good 
intention, and requires it in alms, in prayer, in fasting, indeed in 
every good work. S. Luke (xi. 36) adds some things to this 
parable, which will be expounded in the proper place. 

No man can serve two masters , not only opposite but even different 
masters. It is a proverb, signifying that it is a rare and difficult 
thing to satisfy two masters of different dispositions and tempers, 
or to belong equally to both. Christ applies this proverb to 
avarice and the religion and worship of God. It is impossible to 
be the servant of God and also of money. Wherefore if you 
desire to serve God and give Him your heart, you must tear it 
away from gold and riches. This is Christ's third argument and 
the most powerful ot all, by which He calls away the Scribes and 
all men from the love of riches, because it is indeed impossible to 
serve them and serve God. 

For either he will hate the one, &c. Instead of hold to , Augustine 
reads will suffer , endure (patietur), and explains it to refer to mam- 
mon, or riches, meaning that mammon is so imperious and hard 
a master, that the avaricious serve him with hard servitude, that 
they do not love him, but that they bear or suffer his harsh slavery. 
Vatablus translates, will owe himself to one — will give him his 
heart, will render him a loving servitude. The meaning of this 
disjunctive sentence is : “ The slave of two masters will not in 
reality serve two, but will either hate one and love the other, or 
vice versa , will love and sustain the one, will hate and despise the 
other." 

Ye cannot serve God and mammon . Ye cannot give yourselves up 
to God and the desire of riches, so as to set your heart upon both, 
to expend your cares and works and labours upon both, especially 
since God so wills to be worshipped and loved above all things, 
that He will suffer no rival in the love of Himself. 

Observe, the Heb. pDBD matmon, the Chald. mamon , the Syriac 
mamoma, as S. Jerome says, mean riches and treasures which rich 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



282 


GODDESS OF MONEY. 


men hide in secret receptacles, from the root pD to hide . Or as 
Ang*eius Caninius says from am on, to strengthen, establish . For as 
it is said in Prov. x. 15, " The substance of a rich man is the city 
of his strength." (V ulg.) So, too, riches are called in Hebrew 
charil, from strength, because they make the rich strong and 
powerful. And for this reason mamon is more correctly spelt with 
one m , as it is in the Chald. and Syriac books. Also gain in the 
Punic language, which is akin to Hebrew, is called mammona , as 
S. Augustine tells us (Jib. de Ser . Dom . in Mont. c. 22). Hence also 
the Persian version of this passage renders mammon by transitory 
riches and possessions. 

Observe, Christ does not say, "Ye cannot possess riches and 
God," for Abraham, Isaac, David, Solomon, and many saints had 
both ; but they did not set their hearts upon riches, but used them 
for pious purposes. But He said, “ Ye cannot serve God and riches." 
For he who serves mammon is the slave of riches. He does not 
rule them as their master, but he is ruled by them as their slave, 
so as to undertake all labours and sufferings which the desire of 
wealth suggests to him. Verily this is a hard and miserable 
servitude. But " to serve God is to reign." Well does S. Bernard 
say (Ser. 21 in Cant.), "The covetous man hungers after earthly 
things like a beggar — the believer despises them like a lord. The 
former in possessing them is a beggar, the latter, by despising 
them, keeps them." 

Hear S. Augustine (lib. 4 de Civit. c. 21 — "The heathen were 
wont to commend themselves to the goddess of money, that they 
might be rich — to the god ^Esculanus, and his son, Argentinus, that 
they might have bronze and silver money. They made .^sculanus 
the father of Argentinus, because bronze money was first in use, 
afterwards silver. I really wonder why Argentinus did not beget 
Aurinus, because gold followed silver coin." The reason why 
money was made a goddess was because of her power and 
empire; for, as it is said in Ecclus. x., "All things are obedient to 
money." By money are procured dignities, wine, feasts, clothes, 
horses, chariots, and what not ? Whence Hosea (xii. 8) says of 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



BE NOT ANXIOUS. 


283 

such men, “Verily I am made rich; I have found my idol/' 
(Vulg.) Hence also Juvenal (Satr. 1) says, “With us the majesty 
of riches is the most sacred of all things/' And Petronius Arbiter 
makes them equal, or indeed superior to Jupiter. 

“ Be money there, ask what you please, 

’Twill come : your chest great Jove will seize.* 

Well does S. Jerome say (Episl. 28 ad Lucinium), “ Ye cannot, 
saith the Lord, serve God and mammon. To put away gold 
is the work of beginners, not of the advanced Christian. 
Crates, the Theban, did that, so did Antisthenes. But to offer 
ourselves to God is the distinguishing mark of Christians and 
Apostles : for they, casting with the widow the two farthings of 
their poverty into the treasury, delivered to the Lord all the 
living that they had, and deserved to hear the words, * Ye shall 
sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel/ ” 

Ver. 25. — Wherefore I say unto you , &c. For your life , Vulg., anima, 
“ for your soul." For it has need of food, not strictly speaking, 
but that it may be kept in the body, and animate the body. And 
again, in the soul resides all sense of food, all taste of and pleasure 
in it. For the soul , »>., for the life , as S. Augustine says, because 
the soul is the cause of life. 

For, take no thought , the Greek has /jltj /xcptftvarc, take no anxious 
thought, lest, through care, ye be troubled with anxiety and 
distress ; for the desire of gathering wealth divides the mind, and 
distracts it with various cogitations, cares, and anxieties, and as 
it were cuts it in twain. Christ, then, does not forbid provident 
diligence and labour in procuring the necessaries of life for our- 
selves and those who belong to us, as the Euchitae maintained, 
who wished to pray always without working, against whom S 
Augustine wrote a book, On the Work of Monks . But Christ forbids 
anxious, untimely, fearful solicitude, care that distrusts God, a 
heart grovelling in the earth, and distracted from the service of 
God. 

And in order that He may remove it from us, He gives us 
seven reasons or arguments against it. The 1st is in this verse 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



284 


GOD FEEDS THE BIRDS. 


in the words which immediately follow; this reason is from the care 
which God has of our bodies. The 2nd reason is drawn from 
the birds, for whom God cares and whom He feeds. The 3rd, in 
ver. 27, from the uselessness of all our care without God. The 
4th, in ver. 28, from the lilies and the grass, which God clothes 
and adorns. 5th, in ver. 31, because such a care is fit only for 
pagans, not for Christians. 6th, in ver. 32, because God knows all 
things, and it pertains to His providence to provide us sustenance, 
that He should add food to those who seek the kingdom of God. 
The 7th, ver. 34, because sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof. 
So many arguments does Christ use, because by far the greater 
part of mankind labour under this undue anxiety about providing 
food and raiment for themselves and their families, which is a great 
misery, and more than asinine toil. 

Is not the life , &c. This is the first reason drawn from a minor 
to a major probability, as though He said, “God who gave us 
our souls and Lodies, yea, created them out of nothing, and who 
continually, as it were, recreates them, He surely will give those 
things which are less, as food and clothes, without which the body 
cannot subsist. As S. Chrysostom says, “When God is our 
Feeder, there is no need to be anxious, for * the rich have wanted, 
and suffered hunger, but they that seek after the Lord shall want 
no manner of thing that is good / 99 (Ps. xxxiv. Vulg.) 

Behold the fowls of the air , &c. Are ye not much better than they ? 
Gr. fxaXXav &ia<f>€p€T€ ovtwv Are ye not very different from them ? 
This is the second argument. If God feeds the irrational birds, 
who are not anxious about their living, and gives them corn and 
food which they have not laboured for, how much more will He 
feed you, who are reasoning men, created after His Image, you 
who are His sons and heirs, and redeemed with the Blood of 
Christ. He compares men not to the oxen of the earth, but to 
the birds of heaven, to teach them that they ought to be heavenly, 
and be like birds, and fly away in spirit from earth to heaven, 
and expect from God necessary food both for their souls and 
bodies. For the birds are contented with provision for the day, 


Digitized by 


3y Google 



LOVE OF S. FRANCIS FOR LARKS. 


28 s 


and are not anxious about to-morrow, but rest calmly on God's 
providence, and give up their leisure time to flight and song. 
“ Christ,” says S. Chrysostom, “ might have brought forward the 
examples of Mose6, Elias, John, who were not anxious about 
their food, but He preferred to take the irrational birds, that He 
might the more deeply impress His hearers.” For why cannot 
men do what birds do ? Why should men be anxious when birds 
are not ? 

S. Francis had a wonderful delight in birds, especially in larks, 
and used to invite them to sing the praises of God. So a little 
after his death, some larks came and assisted at his funeral. In 
a vast multitude they flew to the roof of the house in which his 
body lay, and circling around it with gladness more than 
common, they celebrated the praise and glory of the Saint He 
was accustomed to compare the brethren of his Order to larks, 
and to exhort them to imitate them. “ For the lark,” he said, 
“has a crest like a cap. So also the Friars minor wear a cowl, 
or hood, to put them in mind that they ought to imitate the hu- 
mility and innocence of boys, who hide their faces in their caps. 
2. The lark is of an ashen colour, and the frock of the brethren is of 
an ashen grey, to put them in mind of the saying of God to the 
first-formed man, “Remember that thou art dust, or ashes, and 
unto ashes thou shalt return.” 3. Larks live in poverty without 
anxiety, they pluck the grains which the earth affords ; so also the 
brethren profess poverty; they live by begging, without care, 
placing their hope of a harvest in the providence of God and the 
charity of the faithful. 4. Larks, as soon as they have found 
a grain and eaten it, are borne by a direct flight aloft towards 
heaven, that they may shun the eyes of beholders, singing as 
they fly, and returning thanks to God, the Parent and Nourisher of 
all creatures. The brethren do the same, “ for man hath eaten 
angels* food,” *>., bread asked of alms. And the angels incite 
those who are rich to give the brethren bread when they beg. 
Lastly, larks are called in Latin, alaudce , from laus, praise, 
because they praise God by their constant songs. So also the 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



286 


WHY A CUBIT. 


brethren despise earthly things, and seek for heavenly, because 
they are strangers on earth, and citizens of heaven, and they 
know they have been called by God for this object, that they may 
praise Him perpetually with psalmody, by preaching and by a 
holy life. (See Luke Wadding, in Annal. Minor. A. C. 1226, num. 
39 et alii.) Listen to S. Ambrose ( Serm.inc . i.Malacht): “The 

birds," he says, “give thanks for worthless food, wilt thou 
banquet on the most precious feasts and be ungrateful ? Who 
then that has the feeling of a man should not blush to close the 
day without the singing of psalms, when the birds themselves 
manifest their exceeding gladness by the melody of their hymns ? 
And who would not sound His praises in spiritual songs, 
whose praises the birds pronounce with their modulated 
notes? Imitate, then, my brother, the tiny birds by giving 
thanks to thy Creator every morning and evening. And if thou 
hast greater devotion, then imitate the nightingale for whom the 
day is not long enough to sing praise, but makes sweet the 
night watches by her melody. So do thou, passing the day in 
giving thanks and praise, add to this employment the hours of 
the night." 

Which of you by taking thought , Gr. pepifmav, i.e., being solicitous^ 
anxiously thoughtful , or careful. This is Christ's third argument 
against cares. “If the thought and solicitude and labour be 
utterly vain, by which a man would wish to devise some plan 
whereby he might add one cubit to his stature, so that he should 
be higher or taller, yea though he should cogitate for a thousand 
years, and torment himself by devising plans, he would never 
accomplish it ; how much more vain is that anxious care by which 
men strive to prolong life by anxiety and their own pains. For 
as it is the office of God alone to increase the body which He has 
created, and make it attain its proper stature, so much more is it 
His by His fatherly providence, to preserve and lengthen out to 
its appointed end the life which he has given, and supply it w f itb 
necessary food." 

Euthymius here takes notice that a cubit is spoken of because 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



SOLOMON’S ROBS. 


287 

a cubit is the proper measurement for a man's height. For every 
properly proportioned man is four cubits in height, and four in 
width; that is, when his arms are extended from his shoulders. 
This extension of the arms is the measure of every man’s stature. 
And thus man is found to be four-square, that is to say, as broad 
as he is long; to teach him to be four-sided and solid in constancy 
and virtue. 

Vers. 28, 29. — And why take ye thought for raiment P &c. This is 
the fourth argument, drawn from the beauty of lilies. He inti- 
mates that as lilies grow, and are nourished, they are clothed in 
their petals as with raiment. The beauty, fragrance, grase, and 
elegance with which God adorns lilies are very wonderful. (See 
Pliny, lib. 21, c. 5.) 

Christ makes mention of lilies in connection with Solomon’s 
robe, or cloak, because it was of a shining white colour, and 
ornamented with flowers of lilies, worked or embroidered upon 
it with a needle, and vying with lilies in its beauty. Such was 
the nature of the robes worn by kings and princes. Hear Pau- 
sanias ( inEliads , lib. 5) ; where he describes an image of Jupiter : 
“ Besides other things, he had a pallium of cloth of gold, on 
which were embroidered animals of many kinds, but especially 
lilies.” (See Pineda, lib. 6 de rebus Salomoms , c. 5. 

Anagogically , lilies and vestments embroidered with lilies repre- 
sent the robe of glory and immortality with which Christ shall 
clothe His elect in heaven. Wherefore, Ps. xlv. is entitled, For 
lilies , or For those who shall be changed, viz., from death to immor- 
tality, from misery to glory. Wherefore Hilary says that by the 
lilies which neither toil, nor spin, the brightness of the heavenly 
angels is signified, upon whom, in a manner surpassing the 
erudition of human learning, the brightness of glory has been 
placed by God. And since, in the Resurrection, all the saints 
shall be like the angels, He desires us to hope for the robe of 
glory after the fashion of angelic splendour. 

Moreover how lovely lilies are, and how they adorn princes at 
their nuptials, especially Solomon and Christ, and how greatly 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



283 


LfLIES ARE VIRGINS. 


Solomon delighted in them is plain from his Song of Songs, 
where he often says of the bridegroom, “ He feedeth among lilies." 
And again, “I am the flower of the field, and the lily of the 
valleys." (Vulg.). 

Now Christ prefers the loveliness of lilies to the garments of 
Solomon, which were made of silver tissue, embroidered with lilies, 
because they being natural surpass all the elegance of art, which 
is nothing more than an imitation and adumbration of reality. 
For art is, as it were, the ape of nature, and as much as a shadow 
is surpassed by the reality which causes it, so much is nature 
superior to art. As S. Jerome says, “What silk, what regal 
purple, what figures of embroidery, can be compared to flowers ? 
What is as red as a rose ? What is as fair as a lily ? And that 
the purple of the violet is surpassed by no marine shell-fish is the 
judgment of the eye rather than of speech." 

Tropologiccdly , lilies are virgins, who, by increasing in virtues, 
grow in God, and are clothed with the garments of grace now 
and of glory hereafter. Whence it is said in Cant., “As the lily 
among thorns, so is my love among the daughters." 

For if God so clothe i &c. To the beautiful lilies he adds the 
humble grass and hay for greater emphasis. The Greek is 
\oprov, herb or grass . “ If God clothe the grass in the fields with 

such greenness, with such fair blades and germs, which to-day is 
green and to-morrow is cut down and dry, and becomes hay, and 
is cast into the oven or furnace to heat it that it may bake bread, 
how much more will He clothe you, who are believing men, and 
His own sons and friends ? You, I say, who, without any reason, 
are of little faith in the providence of God ? " Observe that by 
this rebuke Christ shows that the common anxiety about food and 
raiment is born of distrust in Divine providence. For if men 
thoroughly trusted in it they would not be so anxious, but would 
securely rest upon it. And then, with moderate labour and trusting 
in Him, God would provide them with all needful things. 

Ver. 3 1 . — For after all these things do the Gentiles seek . This is the 
fifth argument, that anxiety about these earthly things is the mark 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



GOD THE TRUE ATLAS. 28Q 

of a Pagan, and does not become Christians, who believe in the 
providence of God, yea, who feel and experience it every day. 

For your heavenly Father knoweth, &c. The sixth argument. 
God truly knows what ye have need of in the way of food and 
clothes ; He sees and beholds your wants, because He is God. 
Therefore He will provide for them, because He loves you as His 
children, for He is your Father, and He is able to provide, because 
He is your Heavenly and Almighty Father. Why then do ye not 
roll off all your care upon Him ? For He both knows and is 
willing and able to succour your necessity. , Christ adds in Luke 
xii. 29, Neither he ye of doubtful mind . Gr. ftrj /icrcwp^co-tfc, on which 
see what I have there said. Whence S. Francis was wont to give 
his brethren no other provision for a journey than the words of 
the Psalmist, “ Cast thy care upon the Lord, and he will nourish 
thee.” (Ps. lv. 22.) Where for care the Hebrew has jehabcha, which 
the Chaldee renders, thy hope ; S. Jerome, thy love ; Vatablus, 
thy weight , thy burden , *>., thy solicitudes , thine anxieties , thy troubles , 
thy poverty, and whatever burdens thee and weighs thee down . The 
Roman Psalter has, thy cogitation. The root of the word is 
arp yahab , signifying the desire of one who asks , whatever stirs 
and draws out thy anxious prayer. And He shall nourish thee. The 
Hebrew is, shall sustain , shall perfect , shall take care of thee. S. Peter 
says, “ Casting all your care upon Him, for He careth for you.” 
And S. Paul writes to the Philippians, “ Be careful for nothing, 
but in all prayer and supplication with giving of thanks, let your 
requests be made known unto God.” See what is there said. We 
have a narrow mind, slender shoulders, a little strength. But 
God has the far-reaching eyes of His providence, and corre- 
sponding shoulders. For He is the true Atlas, who sustains 
heaven and earth upon His shoulders. 

Ver. 33. — Seek ye therefore . . . all those things shall be added. 

Gr. irpoaOrjcrerai shall be set before you , as SS. Cyprian and 
Augustine read, as bread and meat are set before a hungry 
beggar in a rich man's house. First, not so much in time as in 
dignity says S. Augustine, in estimation and appreciation. Seek 

u 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



290 


ANXIETY 18 


chiefly and above all things the kingdom of God, esteem it above 
all other things, count it as of highest value, but count temporal 
goods of small worth, and as only to be sought after in subordina- 
tion to the kingdom of God, as things which are added by God, 
overweight, so to say, so far, that is, as they conduce to our real 
good. 

Wherefore they err who say : — 

“ O citizens, O citizens, first money get : 

Then, after that, on virtue’s crown your hearts be set” 

Such is the error of those who at this day seek after and pro- 
cure rich appointments, benefices, dignities, bishoprics, with all 
diligence, but think little of the responsibility and their own 
capabilities, and little of their own eternal salvation. The kingdom 
of God , />., His heavenly kingdom, eternal glory and happiness , and 
His righteousness , viz., the means which lead us to the kingdom of 
God, such as God's grace, virtue, good and righteous works, by 
which we become righteous, or more just before God, works 
which God has prescribed and commanded that we should do 
them. 

All these things shall be added . Therefore they are not the reward 
of good works, for this is wholly kept for us in heaven, says S. 
Augustine, but they shall be added as overweight, a little trifling 
addition to the infinite reward. 

Take therefore no thought for the morrow , i.e.,for time future . The 
seventh argument, Leave for the morrow, i.e. y for the time to come, 
the care and anxiety of the morrow. Why do ye wish to be 
anxious and wretched before the time ? For even though to-day ye 
summon to you to-morrow's cares, to-morrow will, on that account, 
bring you not one care the less. Let therefore each care be kept 
for its own time, to-day^s for to-day, to-morrow's for to-morrow; 
thus solicitude being divided into parts will be diminished, will 
become lighter, and will be borne more easily. Verily if a soul 
when it enters a human body could see all the poverty, pain and 
trouble and anguish, which in a lifetime, day after day, minute 
after minute, it would suffer, it would shudder and despair, and 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


FORBIDDEN. 


291 


would not enter the body. Wherefore God hides from us the 
afflictions which we shall have to undergo, that we may take 
them day by day, and so sustain them. Wisely does S. Chrysostom 
say in this passage, “Far be it from us that the cares of another 
day should bruise us. For thou knowest not that thou shalt 
behold the dawning of that day on account of which thou tormentest 
thyself with anxiety/ 1 And “ What does it profit to care about 
future contingencies which, it may be, will never happen ? ” 
Similarly the poet sings — 

“ Thou knowest not what the late eventide may bring. ” 

And the Psalmist says, “ Day unto day uttereth a word, and night 
unto night showeth knowledge/’ (Ps. xix. 3, Vulg.) 

Christ here does not forbid all provision for future time, as for 
instance storing up the harvests of corn and wine and oil : for 
prudence and economy require this to be done : and this is what 
Joseph did so prudently in Egypt. (Gen. xli. 35.) Whence S. 
Anthony (apud Cassian. Collat . 2) says, that some who would keep 
nothing for to-morrow were deceived, and could not bring the task 
they had begun to a suitable end. Christ only forbids useless 
anxieties about the future, unseasonable cares, as when a man is 
anxious about those things the care of which does not, according 
to right reason, pertain to present but to future time. 

Solicitude then is of two kinds, the first moderate and business- 
like, such as right reason dictates ought to be employed for such 
or such an affair or business : this is laudable and needful, with all 
prudence and virtue. The other is immoderate, vain, and un- 
becoming, by which a timid or covetous man vainly torments 
himself about future events which are altogether uncertain, and 
can neither be foreseen nor delayed. This sort of care which the 
Greeks call fjuptfwa is anxious care , worry ; and it is this which Christ 
forbids. Whence the Gloss says, “ Not labour, or provident care, 
is forbidden, but anxiety which chokes the mind/' 

Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof. That, is the day’s trouble, 
care, affliction. Every day brings to man its own trouble and 

u 2 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



2g2 


HOW TO PROVIDE. 


solicitude. The Greek is koklo, evil, badness . It is put here for jcaxc&ris 
the bringing of evil, or afflicting. Thus Jacob said to Pharoah, 
“Few and evil,” that is, miserable, “have been the days of the 
years of my pilgrimage.” (Gen. xlvii. 9.) So, on the other hand, 
goodness or good, is to be taken for joyful, glad, pleasant, as 
Ps. cxxxiii., “ Behold how good and joyful a thing it is, brethren, 
to dwell together in unity/* Thus SS. Jerome, Chrysostom, 
Augustine, &c. S. Chrysostom gives the reason, “ That He may 
rebuke them more sharply, He has almost personified time itself, 
and introduced it as though itself afflicted by men, as though it 
cried out against them on account of the superfluous affliction 
which they impose upon it” Hear also S. Augustine: “Necessity 
He calls evil, because it is for a punishment: it pertains to 
mortality, which we have deserved by sin. When we see the 
servant of God providing for necessary things, we do not think he 
is acting contrary to the commandment of God. For the Lord, as 
an example, kept a bag. And in the Acts of the Apostles we 
read, that necessary things were provided for the future on 
account of the threatened famine. We are therefore not forbidden 
to provide, but to fight on account of those things/’ 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



CHAPTER VII. 


2 Christy ending his sermon on the mount , reproveth rash judgment ', 6 for* 
biddeth to cast holy things to dogs , 7 Exhorteth to prayer , 13 To enter in at 
the strait gate, 15 To beware of false prophets % 21 *0/ to be hearers , 

but doers of the word. 

J UDGE not, that ye be not judged. 

2 For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged : and with what 
measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again. 

3 And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother’s eye, but considerest 
not the beam that is in thine own eye ? 

4 Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of thine 
eye : and, behold, a beam is in thine own eye ? 

5 Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye ; and then shaft 
thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother’s eye. 

6 Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before 
swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rend you. 

7 Ask, and it shall be given you ; seek, and ye shall find ; knock, and it shall 
be opened unto you : 

8 For every one that asketh receiveth ; and he that seeketh findeth ; and to 
him that knocketh it shall be opened. 

9 Or what man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he give him a 
stone? 

10 Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent? 

II If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, 
how much more shall your Father which is in heaven give good things to them 
that ask him ? 

12 Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye 
even so to them : for this is the law and the prophets. 

13 Enter ye in at the strait gate : for wide is the gate, and broad is the way, 
that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat « 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



294 

14 Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life ; 
and few there be that find it 

15 Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep's clothing, but 
inwardly they are ravening wolves : 

16 Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or 
figs of thistles ? 

17 Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree 
bringeth forth evil fruit 

18 A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring 
forth good fruit 

19 Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into 
the fire. 

20 Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them. 

21 Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the 
kingdom of heaven ; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven. 

22 Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in 
thy name ? and in thy name have cast out devils ? and in thy name done many 
wonderful works ? 

23 And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you : depart from me, ye 
that work iniquity. 

24 Therefore whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them, I will 
liken him unto a wise man, which built his house upon a rock : 

25 And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and 
beat upon that house ; and it fell not : for it was founded upon a rock. 

26 And every one that heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them not, 
shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house upon the sand : 

27 And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and 
beat upon that house ; and it fell : and great was the fall of it 

28 And it came to pass, when Jesus had ended these sayings, the people were 
astonished at his doctrine : 

29 For he taught them as one having authority, and not as the scribes. 

Judge not , rashly and malignantly, that ye, &c. Christ does not 
here prohibit the public judgments of magistrates, by which they 
condemn the guilty and absolve the innocent, for this is necessary 
in all commonwealths, but only private judgments, and that when 
they are rash, envious, detractive, for they are repugnant to 
charity and justice, yea to God Himself, whose office of judgment 
is usurped. For we have not been set to be judges but com- 
panions of our neighbours. Wherefore if we have an evil opinion 
of him we do him an injury. And we take away his good fame 
if we let this judgment go abroad ; for reputation is a great good, 
greater far than riches. So S. Jerome, Bede, and Basil. The 
Gloss says, “ There is scarcely any one who is found to be free 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



SAINT YI TALI US. 


29S 


from this fault.” Hear S. Augustine (102 Serm . de Temp,) : “ Con- 
cerning those things, then, which are known to God, unknown to 
us, we judge our neighbours at our peril. Of this the Lord hath 
said, Judge not. But concerning things which are open and public 
evils, we may and ought to judge and rebuke, but still with 
charity and love, hating not the man, but the sin, detesting not 
the sick man, but the disease. For unless the open adulterer, 
thief, habitual drunkard, traitor, were judged and punished, that 
would be fulfilled which the blessed martyr Cyprian hath said, 
* He who soothes a sinner with flattering words, administers fuel 
to his sin/ ” S. Anthony gives the cause of perverseness in rash 
judgment, when he says, “We are often deceived as to the motives 
of actions. The judgment of God, who sees all things, is another 
thing from ours. But it is right that we should suffer one with 
another, and bear one another’s burdens/ 1 So S. Athanasius, 
in his Life. 

Thai ye he not judged , z>., neither by men nor God. Ye will 
escape very many unjust judgments of others, or, anyhow, ye will 
not experience the severe judgment of God. Hear S. Augustine: 
“ The temerity wherewith thou dost punish another will punish 
thyself. Injustice always injures him who does the wrong/ 1 

Some MSS. add here, Condemn not , and ye shall not be condemned) 
but it seems to have been added from Luke vi. 37. 

Leontius, Bishop of Cyprus, in his Life of S. John the Almoner, 
c. 35, relates that Vitalius, who converted many harlots, was 
slapped on the face, and judged to be a fornicator, by a certain 
person ; but this judge was in turn slapped on the face by the 
devil, and possessed by him, and could only be delivered by 
coming as a suppliant to the cell of Vitalius, who was dead. 
When he came thither, there was found written on the pavement, 
by the hand of God, “ O ye men of Alexandria, judge not before 
the time until the Lord shall come/ 1 Wisely saith S. Bernard 
(Serm. 40 in Cant.), “ Make an excuse for the intention with which 
a thing is done, when you cannot excuse the thing itself; set it 
down, if possible, to ignorance, inadvertence.” 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


296 


JUDGE NOT. 


For with what judgment , &c. Says S. Chrysostom, “ In what 
way thine own sins shall be examined, thou hast thyself provided 
a rule, by judging severely the things in which thy neighbour has 
offended, for judgment without mercy shall be awarded to him 
who has shown no mercy/ says S. James " (ii. 13). 

Cassian (lib. 5 de Instit. renunc. c. 40) says that a certain abbot 
called Maches was wont to relate of himself, that, by God's per- 
mission, he had fallen into three faults for which he had been 
accustomed to judge others, and had been punished for them. 
S. Dorotheus ( Doctrina 6), in a chapter upon not judging, relates 
that an angel once brought the soul of an adulterer to a certain 
old man, who had condemned him, and said, “Lo, here is the 
dead man whom thou hast judged. Where am I to take his soul, 
to heaven or to hell ? Thou hast appointed thyself the judge of 
the dead, in the place of Christ. Judge then this soul." At these 
words the old man was pricked with compunction, begged for 
pardon, and did penance for the rest of his life. Matthew Rader, 
the Jesuit, among many other golden sayings, has this — “A 
crooked measuring-rule makes even straight things appear 
crooked." Thus melancholy, and the proclivity to suspect evil of 
others engendered by it, is most deceptive: it deceives itself, 
and then goes on to deceive others. Wherefore let him who 
suffers from this disease learn, from the experience of his own 
suspicions, that they are for the most part false and deceptive, and 
so let him say, ‘ 1 will no longer give credit to you, for so far I 
have found you liars.' " 

With what measure , &c. This is an adage, signifying the same 
thing. According to the rule, or measure, by which thou judgest 
others, so shalt thou be judged thyself. If thou shalt show thyself 
kindly in judging, then will others judge thee kindly: if thou 
judgest others severely, then severely will others judge thee. 
Understand here similar, not equal measure. For our measure 
cannot equal God's. His severity and His mercy both far surpass 
ours. Yet is His severity less than our faults. For God punishes 
sin less than it deserves. S. James follows Christ the Lord, when 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


THK TWO WALLETS. 


2Q7 


he says, “Speak not evil one of another, brethren. Whoso 
speaketh evil of his brother, or judgeth his brother, speaketh evil 
of the law, and judgeth the law ” (iv. 1 1). See what I have there 
said. 

And why beholdest ihou ? Gr. ov Karayoct?, dost not perceive . The mote, 
Gr. to Kapifxy;, that is, hit of straw , or chaff, or tiny particle of wood, 
such as easily get into the eye. These things are put in contrast 
with a heavy beam or block. The mote signifies little faults and 
defects; the beam denotes greater crimes. There is an elegant 
allusion to the sight of the eye. The eye does not see itself and 
its own blemishes, but those of others. In a similar manner the 
critics see not, nor think of their own defects, but those of others. 
To their own they are as blind as moles : for those of others they 
have the eyes of lynxes. They take offence at the very least 
faults of others, but view with complacency and approval their 
own huge faults. To this refers the proverb, “ We do not see the 
bag on our own backs 99 about which .Esop has a fable. “ Every 
man,” he says, “ carries two wallets, one on his breast, the other 
hanging from his shoulders on his back, and into the first we put 
other people’s faults, but our own into the bag behind. This is 
that selfishness (<£tXavT ta) which is innate in men. 

By the same fable an abbot dealt with and corrected his criti- 
cizing anchorites. ( Vit. Pat. lib. 5, lihello 9, num . 9.) He filled 
a sack with a great quantity of sand, and put it on his back, and 
carried before him in his hand a basket with a very small quantity 
of sand. When asked why he did this, he replied, “ That bag 
which holds most sand is my sins, and because they are many, 

I have put them on my back lest I should grieve and lament over 
them ; but the little quantity of sand is the sins of my brother, 
and they are before my face, and in them I exercise myself in 
Judging my brother.” When the Abbot Isaac had once judged a 
certain person, an angel stood before him and said, “ God has 
sent me to ask you whither I am to cast that brother whom 
you have judged?” When Isaac heard this, he sought for- 
giveness. And the angel said, “ Arise, God forgives thee, but be 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



298 


PEARLS. 


careful for the time to come not to judge any before God judges 
them.” 

Or how wilt thou say, Ac . With what face canst thou animadvert 
upon, or correct a slight fault of thy neighbour's, when thou 
toleratest an enormous offence in thyself? 

Thou hypocrite , &c. See clearly : Gr. kxfiaXiiv. As it. 

is impossible that he who has a beam in his own eye could see to 
pluck out a little mote from his brother's eye, because of the beam 
filling and darkening his own eye, so in like manner it is barely 
possible that any one whose mind and reason are clouded by 
grave sin could see how to correct the very small faults of others. 
For how canst thou hate the very small developments of those 
things which in an extreme degree thou perceivest not in thyself? 

Give not that which is holy, &c. Christ, according to His custom, 
proceeds to teach by parables and proverbs. There is here a 
double proverb, each signifying the same thing. And both are 
rightly connected with what precedes. He had just shown who 
and what manner of persons they ought to be who correct 
others. Now He teaches who ought to be corrected and taught, 
and who not. Pearls , therefore, and that which is holy, here 

signify the same thing, namely the precious and heavenly- 
doctrine of the Gospel, of faith and truth, and, by consequence, 
the holy sacraments. Moreover, the same persons are denoted 
by dogs and swine, viz., those who are perverse and obstinate. 
These, on account of their impurity, are like pigs, and on 
account of their rebellious barking, like dogs. He adds the 
reason, because they, like hungry swine, stolid and impudent, 
despise and trample on holy doctrines which are the food of the 
soul, because they are contrary to their appetite and uncleanness. 
In the next place they are bitter against the setter forth of the 
holy doctrine, and tear him either by words, or deeds. 

These words of Christ must be taken per se, because, per accidens, 
Christ the Lord, S. Stephen, S. Paul, and others, preached the 
Gospel to the perverse and obstinate Jews, although they knew' that 
they would be slain by them for so doing. For this they did that . 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



ASK, SEEK, KNOCK. 


299 


they might give public testimony to the truth and glory of God, 
and for the profit of those who were standing by. For in this 
way holy things are not presented to swine, but to God and His 
elect. Thus S. Augustine, who by dogs understands opposers 
of the truth, and by swine despisers of it. But by dogs S. 
Chrysostom understands the Gentiles, as most impure ; by swine , 
heretics, as addicted to the belly. By that which is holy , he under- 
stands Baptism and the Eucharist, which must not be given to 
impure and unworthy persons ; pearls are the mysteries of the 
truth, inclosed in the Divine words as in the depths of the sea, 
i.e., in the profundity of Holy Scripture. 

Ask and it shall be given , &c. • He returns to the subject of 
prayer, of which He had begun to treat, vi. 5. Ask, viz., from 
God, by prayer, those things about which I have been teaching, 
such as are necessary for you, but arduous and difficult, and espe- 
cially the things which I have laid down to be looked for in the 
Lord’s Prayer. For to it Luke refers these words (xi. 9). 
Observe, these three words, ask , seek , knock , mean the same thing, 
that is, earnest prayer. To ask signifies confidence in prayer as 
a prime requisite; to seek signifies zeal and diligence, for he 
who seeks for anything, applies the whole vigour of his mind to 
obtain what he seeks. To knock means perseverance. 

Christ then signifies that we must pray faithfully, diligently, 
ardently, and perseveringly. So S. Augustine, who says that ask 
refers to praying for strength, by which we may be able to fulfil 
the commandments of God : seek , that we may find the truth : 
knock, that heaven may be opened unto us. 

To this we may add the words of S. Chrysostom. “Ask,” he 
says, “ in supplications, praying night and day : seek by zeal and 
labours, for heaven is not given to the slothful : knock in prayers, 
in fastings, and almsgiving, for he who knocks at a door knocks 
with his hand.” 

Again, these three words denote increasing earnestness in 
prayer. When anything is asked for, it is first spoken for ; by- 
and-by, if no answer be given, we cry out; if calling out do 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


TUB KEY OF HEAVEN. 


300 

not suffice, we seek for some other means of gaining attention, 
we apply our mouth to some chink in the door by which our 
voices may be made to reach the master of the house : if that too 
fail, we beat at the door, until we gain a hearing. Hence 
Remigius thus expounds, " We ask by praying ; we seek by living 
well; we knock by persevering/' Others, “ Ask by faith, seek by 
hope, knock by charity/' Lastly, Climacus ( Gradu 28) says, Ask 
by striving, seek by obedience, knock by long-suffering. 

Mystically , S. Bernard (in Scala Claustralium ) : “ Seek by 
reading, and ye shall find in meditation : knock in prayer, and it 
shall be opened to you in contemplation. Reading offers solid 
food to the mouth, meditation masticates it, reason gives it 
flavour, contemplation is the very sweetness itself which pleases 
and refreshes." He then defines these four processes. “Medi- 
tation is a studious action of the mind, which under the guidance 
of right reason searches out the knowledge of hidden truth : 
contemplation is the elevation of a mind depending upon God, 
and tasting the joys of eternal sweetness. Reading searches, 
meditation finds, contemplation feeds, prayer asks." 

For every one that asketh receiveth , &c. Elegantly and truly says 
S. Augustine, or whoever was the author of lib . de Salutar . Monitis ■ 
(c. 28), “The prayer of the righteous is the key of heaven. Prayer 
ascends, God’s mercy descends." The same S. Augustine (lib. 
senten . apud Prospr. Sent . 87), says, “ The physician knows best 
what is good for the sick man. Therefore God sometimes in 
mercy hears not." Again he says (ad Paulinum , Epist. 43), 
“The Lord often denies what we wish for, that he may give us 
what we would rather, in the end." And the Gloss says, “ God 
does not deny Himself to those who ask, for He voluntarily offered 
Himself to those who asked not for him. And those who seek 
shall find Him : for He gave Himself to those who sought Him 
not, that He might be found of them : and He will open to those 
who knock, for He it is who crieth out, * Behold, 1 stand at the 
door and knock/ " 

Or what man is there of you , &c. The force of the or in this verse 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



S. CHRYSOSTOM'S VIEW. 301 

is, that God is more liberal than man. It, as it were, compares 
God and man, and shows the superiority of God to man. 

Or if he ask a fish , &c. For a serpent has the appearance and 
form of a fish, so that it might be deceitfully substituted for a 
fish, though only by an enemy, not by a father. He says the 
same thing that He said in the previous verse, but by a still more 
striking similitude. For if a father gave a stone to a child who 
asked him for bread, he would only give him a useless and uneat- 
able thing; but if he gave him a serpent when he asked for a 
fish, he would give him not only a useless but a noxious and 
poisonous thing. Thus Christ speaks of what is a moral impos- 
sibility. 

If ye then being evil, &c. Being evil: i.e. " by the natural pro- 
pensity to evil, which ye have contracted in your nature by sin." 
So S. Jerome. “ Also by your own will and actions." Whence 
it is plain that these words were spoken to the people generally, 
not to the Apostles. For the Apostles were good, but among 
the multitude there were many who were evil and entangled in 
vices. S. Chrysostom was of another opinion : “ In comparison 
with God," he says, “ all appear evil, even the good, as in com- 
parison with the sun all things, even such as are light, appear 
dark." 

Give good things . Luke has, will give the good Spirit . For all 
good things are given by the grace of the Holy Spirit, says 
Remigius. By good things understand true and solid goods which 
lead to blessedness. Whence S. Augustine says, “Gold and 
silver are good, not because they make thee good, but because 
thou mayest do good with them." 

Therefore all things whatsoever ye would ’ &c. The word therefore , 
some are of opinion, has not here any inferential meaning, but 
is only an enclitic particle, denoting the conclusion of this part 
of our Lord's Sermon. Hence the Syriac omits it. On the 
other hand we may, with S. Chrysostom, take the therefore as 
inferential, and then the meaning would be this: “What I 
have hitherto said at large concerning love of your neighbour 


Digitized by CjOOQle 



302 


THE STRAIT GATE. 


and giving of alms, all these things arise out of this primary 
natural precept, and first ^principle of moral philosophy, and 
rest upon equity, that what thou wishest to be done to thyself, 
that thou shouldst do to others, and what thou dost not w f ish 
to suffer from others, that thou shouldst not do unto others." 
Understand that z vishest and wishest not , must be taken in a good 
sense, as guided by right reason. For the man who wishes wine 
to be given him that he may get drunk may not lawfully offer it 
to others for such a purpose. Christ here alludes to the moni- 
tion which Tobit, when he was dying, gave to his son (iv. 16) : 
“That which thou wouldst hate to be done unto thyself, take heed 
that at no time thou doest it to another.” 

Enter ye in at the strait gate , &c. The strait gate, by which there 

is an entrance into heaven, to blessedness and the feast of celes- 
tial glory, is, says S. Augustine, the Law of God, which straitens 
and represses our desires : it is also obedience, continence, mor- 
tification, the daily cross, which the law bids either to be made 
or to be carried. The broad gate which leads to perdition is 
concupiscence, too great liberty, gluttony, lust, Ac. Christ has 
here regard to His own sanctions and explanations of the Law, 
as, Whosoever shall say , Thou fool , shall be in danger of hell fire , and, 
If any one shall smite thee on thy right cheek , offer him the other also , &c. 
For all these things are arduous and strait, or narrow. It is as 
though He had said, “ I may seem to you to have made narrow 
the way of salvation by my precepts, but know ye, that it is 
strait even in itself, and therefore I have not straitened it, but have 
only described it as it really is; for the way to celestial glory is 
purity and sanctity, which in this corrupt state of your nature 
consist in a strict bridling and mortification of your passions.” 
By liberty and indulgence Adam fell into sin, and we all through 
him, and then into all concupiscence. Thus the remedy for these 
things is nothing else but strict self-restraint, the cross, and mor- 
tification ; for contraries are cured by contraries. S. Ambrose 
says, on the first Psalm. “There are two ways, one of the just, 
the other of the unjust : one ot equity, the other of iniquity. The 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



SAINT BARLAAM. 


303 


way of the just is narrow, that of the unjust is broad. The 
narrow road is that of soberness, the broad of drunkenness, that 
it may receive those who are tossing about.” Clemens Alexan- 
drinus ( Strom . lib. 4) cites with praise the words of Hesiod: 
“ Intense labour is placed before virtue, the way to it is long and 
steep.” Also that of Simonides, “ Virtue is said to dwell on rocks 
difficult of access.” And so S. Basil says on the first Psalm : 
“That broad and easy road which goeth downward hath the 
deceiving evil demon who draws those who follow him by 
indulgences to perdition. But a good angel presides over the 
rough, and steep, and difficult way, which leads by means of 
zealous toils those who pursue it to a blessed end.” Wherefore 
S. Luke has (xiii. 24), Strive to enter in at the strait gate , where for 
strive, the Greek has dytov^cortfc, i.e. agonize, contend as it were 
in a contest and an agony, exercise your utmost power and might 
as in a wrestling match, as if for life itself, if ye conquer; but for 
death, if ye be overcome ; according to the words of the Apostle, 
“ Every one that striveth for the mastery (in agone , Gr. and Vulg.) 
is temperate in all things. Now they do it to obtain a corruptible 
crown, but we an incorruptible.” We then enter upon a contest, 
and in it we strive and agonize for heaven or for hell, for a most 
blessed or a most miserable eternity. And let each see in how 
great a match he wrestles : for the course and the way to life is 
the Cross ; the course and the way to perdition is indulgence : it 
is the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. 
The way to life is continence, poverty of spirit and humility. 
Wherefore S. Barlaam said to king Josaphat, that the way to 
life is martyrdom, either of blood or of will and penitence : this is 
the way in which Christ has gone before us : and for this cause 
the first Christians and those who followed Him willingly met 
martyrdom, and when persecution had ceased, those who came 
after inflicted upon themselves the voluntary martrydom of an 
austere life in monasteries, deserts, and caves. 

So also S. Perpetua saw in her dream a golden ladder, but 
hedged about with knives and swords. By this ladder she had to 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


304 


FEW SAVED. 


climb to heaven, and by this dream she knew that martyrdom was 
foretold to herself and her companions. 

So also S. William, who, from Duke of Aquitaine, became a 
peninent hermit, gathered from these words of Christ, that all 
superfluities ought to be cut off, and the body only indulged in 
things necessary. “ How many brethren/’ said he, “ have served 
the Lord these many years in Egypt without eating fish ? For 
how many tyrants, now in hell, would Jerome’s sack, Benedict’s 
frock, Arsenius' tears, Elisha’s cowl, have sufficed to keep them 
out of hell ? But woe to us, miserable, who changed superfluity 
into necessity.” 

Pythagoras saw the same thing in a shadow. He said that at 
first the path of virtue is narrow and confined, but afterwards it 
becomes wider by degrees : but the way of pleasure on the other 
hand is wide at the beginning, but afterwards it becomes more 
and more straitened. For as the Apostle says, “ Tribulation and 
anguish is upon every soul of man that worketh evil, but glory, 
honour and peace to every one that doeth good.” (Rom. ii.) 
For charity and the grace of Christ enlarge the heart, so that the 
believer may say confidently with the Psalmist, “ I will run the 
way of Thy commandments when Thou hast enlarged my heart ” 

( dilatasti, Vulg.). 

For strait is the gate , &c. This is the voice of Eternal Wisdom : 
He then who is wise, and will set himself in earnest to save his 
soul, let him take the narrow way. 

The measure of this straitness and narrowness of the way 
to heaven, and the fewness of those who find it, and are saved, 
you may gather from the types. First there is Lot, who only with 
his two daughters escaped from the burning of Sodom and the 
other cities of the plain, when all the rest were burnt up because 
of their lusts. For the world is like Sodom, it is inflamed with 
lusts and passions. Wherefore the greater part of the lost are 
damned on account of pollutions and lusts. The second type 
is the deluge. From this Noah only, with seven souls, escaped. 
The deluge swallowed up all the rest on account of their sins. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


THE CHURCH A THRESHING FLOOR. 


30S 


In the world is a deluge of iniquity, and thus of punishments and 
all calamities. The third was the entrance into the Promised 
Land, which was a type of heaven. Into this of six hundred 
thousand Israelites, there entered but two, Caleb and Joshua. All 
this is taught too by the infallible words of Christ, “Many are 
called, but few chosen." Wisely does Cassian advise, “ Live with 
the poor that thou mayest deserve to be found and saved amongst 
the few." 

This moreover is true if you consider the mass of mankind. 
For by far the greater portion of men are Infidels, Turks, Sara- 
cens, or heretics. S. Augustine (lib. 4 contr. Crescentic. 53) 
compares the Church to a threshing-floor in which there is 
far more chaff than grains of wheat, more bad than good, more 
who will be damned than ‘will be saved. Yet others, with 
greater mildness, think it probable that the greater portion ot 
professing Christians will be saved, because most of them re- 
ceive the Holy Sacraments before they die. And they justify 
sinners, not only those who have contrition, but who have 
attrition. But this seems to be true of those who have not 
lived in constant and habitual sins, such as fornication, usury, 
hatred. For such, when they are sick, conceive with difficulty 
any serious and efficacious purpose of amendment, or if they do 
conceive it, God in just punishment of their past sins suffers the 
demon of their bygone lusts to tempt them, and he furbishes and 
sharpens their memory, and so the sick man in consequence 
of his habits easily yields, and consents in his heart to sin, 
and thus he falls and is damned. Of this there are many 
examples. 

Beware of false prophets , &c. Christ passes on to a most salu- 
tary admonition concerning the taking heed of false teachers, 
who teach that the way to heaven is not strait, but easy, and 
who thus send those who follow them not to heaven but to hell. 
They teach that we need not fast, nor go to confession, nor 
preserve virginity, nor religious vows; they allow all sorts of 
liberty to the flesh, and take away all merit from good works. 

x 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


30 6 


ERRORS OF LUTHER 


Observe, a prophet in Scripture means not only one who fore- 
tells future events, but many other persons, such as holy and 
religious men, singers, workers of miracles, and here as in many 
other places, a doctor or teacher. For the prophets were 
teachers, who made known the way of life, and of understanding 
things which were not plain to others, whether he foretold future 
events or not. For in Hebrew a prophet is called a seer, because 
he sees secret and hidden things, especially such things as future 
events. False prophets therefore are false teachers, whether they 
be heretics, or Gentiles and Pagans. 

Now the sheep's clothing which these wolves put on are to veil 
their errors and heresies, first under the plea of liberty of con- 
science; 2. By quoting texts of Scripture that serve to favour their 
heresies ; 3. The pretext of reforming the morals of the Church, 
especially those of the clergy and ecclesiastics ; 4. By the simu- 
lation of meekness, simplicity, and piety; 5. By soft speeches, 
and a garrulous eloquence by which they cover their wolfish 
ferocity. 

Which come , in truth, from themselves, neither called nor sent, 
nor approved by the bishops and prelates of the Church. Con- 
cerning these it is said (Jer. xxiii. 21), “I have not sent these 
prophets, yet they ran." 

By their fruits, &c. Do mm gather ? As grapes are not wont to 
be produced by or gathered off thorns, nor figs off thistles, so in 
like manner, no good or sweet trait can be collected from heresy 
or heretics, but only harsh and thorny fruit. This fruit is of two 
kinds — 1. Of false doctrine; 2. Of bad morals and wickedness. 
Luther and Calvin have given examples in this age. For Luther 
teaches that vows are not binding upon the religious : that man 
does not possess free will, that he is the slave of necessity, that 
he must sin : that faith alone justifies : that good works have no 
merit before God. Calvin teaches that God is the author of 
evils : that Christ despaired on the Cross, that He felt the pains of 
hell, &c .; which things are downright blasphemy, and contrary to 
the natural law and to reason. Calvin also maintained that the 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



AND OF CALVIN. 


307 


Faith, by which he meant his own perversion of it, should be de- 
fended and propagated by force of arms, even by the slaughter of 
lawful princes and kings, of bishops, priests, and Catholics who 
opposed it. Whence we have heard of, and almost seen with 
our eyes in England, France, and Germany, so many murders, 
robberies, banishments of priests and Catholics, and a vast 
deluge of iniquity, and as it were a universal conflagration of 
goodness. We have seen the Blessed Sacraments profaned, the 
Holy Sacrifice abolished, vows broken, the saints contemned, 
churches burnt, the sacred canons set at nought, virgins violated, 
and all such like. For, as John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, who, 
with Thomas More, was a glorious martyr in England under 
Henry VIII., truly says, “Lust is at once the mother and the child 
of heresy.” 

So every good tree. See. “Fora good tree is not distinguished from 
an evil one by ks leaves or flowers,” says S. Bernard ( Epist . 
107), but by its fruit. 

Observe, I. By good tree in this place, we are not to understand 
* a good will, or charity, and by a corrupt tree an evil will, as S- 
Augustine, Chrysostom, and others think, but a good or bad 
teacher, for about these the words immediately preceding are 
spoken. 

Note, 2. By the fruit of the tree , *>., of a doctor, must be understood 
his doctrine, which comes forth true from a true teacher, false from 
a false one. 

A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit , &c. “ A thorn tree 

cannot produce grapes, nor thistles figs, but a thorn must produce 
thorns, and a thistle thistles, as I have said ; and vice versa, a 
vine cannot produce thorns, but grapes ; and although the grapes 
and the figs should not ripen, but remain sour, that does not 
arise from the fault of the vine, or the fig-tree, but from unseason- 
able weather, and deficiency of the sun’s heat. In like manner 
a prophet, that is, a true teacher, cannot teach false doctrine, nor 
can a false teacher teach the truth, or act altogether rightly and 
holily. You must take this in a composite and formal sense, so 

x 2 


Digitized by 


Google 


A 



A GOOD TREE, A GOOD TEACHER. 


30S 

far, that is, as the teacher is good or bad ; because in a concrete 
and material sense, the good doctor may fall away from his good- 
ness, and teach or do wicked things. The Scribes taught right, 
but their deeds were evil. The converse also of this is some • 
times true. 

Many heretics have wrested this sentence of Christ, applying it 
falsely for the establishing their own heresies. For first, the 
Manichaeans endeavoured to prove from it that some men 
are by nature good ana others evil; or that there are two 
natural Principles, one good, which makes some men good ; the 
other evil, which makes some men bad. 2. Jovinian maintained 
from these words that a man who is born of God is not able to 
commit sin. (See S. Jerome, contra Jovinian .) 3. The Pelagians 

inferred from it that there is no original sin, because from a good 
marriage as from a good tree, such an evil fruit as sin cannot be 
produced. Teste S. Augustine {lib. de Nupt . et Concup. c. 26). 4. 
The Donatists gathered from it that wicked priests, as bad trees, 
cannot properly baptize. 5. The Calvinists argue from it that 
there is no free will in man to bring forth good works, or bad. 
The same infer from it that we are not justified by good works, but 
only declared righteous, since a tree is not made good by its good 
fruits, but is manifested by them to be good. But all these things are 
falsely inferred. They have none of them anything to do with 
the passage. For Christ properly applies this maxim only to 
prophets, that is to true or false teachers, as I have said. 

Not every one that saith unto me , &c. Behold here Christ clearly 
describes the fruit of a good tree, *>., of a good doctor and 
Christian that verily it is to do the will of our Heavenly Father, 
that in truth thou shouldst not only believe in Him and in His 
law as set forth by Christ, but that thou shouldst in deed, and in 
all things, fulfil the same. So says S. Augustine (lib. 2 de Serm. 
in Monti). Therefore Christ says, Not every one that saith unto Me t 
Lord \ Lord : that is, not every one who believeth in Me as Lord 
and God, or invokes Me as such, or who often has My name on 
his lips, in attestation of his words and his doctrine, as though he 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



A BAB TREE, A BAD TEACHER. 


309 


were preaching the pure Gospel, as the heretics boast — such a 
one, I say, shall not enter into the Palace and Kingdom of Heaven’s 
Father, but he who, shall do that Father’s will, that is, who shall 
fulfil His Commandments. And these are two. I. To believe in 
Christ, with an orthodox faith, and 2, to perform in act and deed 
the commands of Christ. For " duties in words obtain not the 
kingdom of Heaven.” “We must do some thing and offer 
some thing that is our own to obtain a blissful eternity,” says S. 
Hilary. And “ the road to the kingdom of heaven is obedience, 
not the speaking of a name,” says the Gloss . 

Many shall say unlo me in that day — the Day of Judgment. For 
that shall be the last and greatest Day of the world. That Day 
shall be the gate of eternity, and shall send those who have done 
good works 4 to a blessed, and those who have done evil works to 
a miserable eternity. "Then,” as S. Chrysostom says, "the 
works of each shall speak, while their tongues keep silence, nor 
shall one intercede for another.” 

Lord , Lord, have we not prophesied, &c. Have we not foretold 
future events by Thy light and grace ? So Maldonatus. Or other- 
wise, Have we not by the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, by Thy 
commission and authority taught and preached the true faith ? 
So Jansen. 

And done many wonderful works . He calls wonderful works, or 
miracles \ virtues, as it is in the Greek and Vulgate. And those real 
miracles. For it is plain from this verse that God does sometimes 
work miracles even by false prophets, as He did by Judas the 
traitor (Luke x. 17, &c.) and Caiaphas (John xi. 49.) And 
Balaam the soothsayer (Numb. xxiv. 3). S. Jerome says, “To 
work miracles is sometimes not because of his goodness who 
works them : but it is the invocation of the name of Christ which 
performs them for the good of others.” Whence S. Gregory 
collects (lib. 20, Moral \ 8) : “ The proof of sanctity is not the per- 
formance of miracles, but to love one’s neighbour as oneself, and 
to think of God what is true, and to think better of one’s neigh- 
bour than of oneself.” 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


3io 


MIRACLES NEVER WROUGHT. 


Observe, although impious and false teachers may,' by the gift 
oi God, prophesy and work miracles, yet they cannot do this for 
the confirmation of false doctrine. For a miracle, even a solitary 
one, so long as it is real and plain, is not only a probable, but a 
morally certain proof of true doctrine, whence Christ and the 
Apostles use it as an inviolable argument for proving the 
Christian faith. Nor do we ever read of a miracle being wrought 
in confirmation of heresy or error. And a priori reasoning shows 
this. For a miracle is a singular and supernatural operation of God 
alone, by which, as by His own seal, God attests the right faith and 
truth ; wherefore if God should hearken to a false teacher calling 
upon Him to confirm his error by a miracle, He would seem to 
co-operate with him, and attest his error, and by consequence, 
lie and deceive, which is impossible. For God is the Prime 
Verity, and the Truth itself, and He has reserved the power of 
working miracles to Himself alone, that by them, as a testimony 
peculiar to Himself, He may seal His own Word and His own 
Truth, and testify that they emanate from Him. A miracle 
therefore is as it were the Voice of God working and attesting 
that He does speak; and He confirms His words by it as by a 
seal. For other things are common to God, with angels, and 
devils. Wherefore in them it is doubtful whether God, or an 
angel, or the devil speaks and works. So D. Thomas (2 a. 2 a. 
quasi. 178, art. 2) and theologians passim . And S. Augustine 
(lib. ccmlra Epist . Fundamen/i, c. 4) declares that he was held in the 
Church by the chains of miracles. And Richard de S. Victor says, 
(lib. 1 dt Trinit. c. 2), “ O Lord, if it be error which we believe, 
we have been deceived by Thee. For our faith has been 
confirmed among us by such signs and wonders as could not 
have been wrought unless they were done by Thee.” (See also 
Bellarmine, lib. 4, On ihe notes of the Churchy c. 14.) 

Let us observe, however, here, that if the gift of miracles has been 
given to any one by God for any reason, as an abiding habit, or 
condition, such a one may afterwards abuse the gift, and work the 
miracle for an evil end, such, for example, as vain glory, gain, or 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



TO CONFIRM HERESY. 3 1 1 

the confirmation of what is false. For in such a case God concurs 
indeed with the miracle itself but not with the abuse of it, or with 
the evil object of him who works it. For this He only permits. 
Thus God concurs with an impious priest in the consecration ot 
the Eucharist, even though the priest intends to abuse it for the 
purposes of sorcery, or blasphemy, yea even to sell it to a Jew to 
mock at and pierce it. And understand this, that I have said as 
to a wicked man abusing the gift of miracles, upon the principle, 
that any grace given by God for one end may be abused by evil 
men for another end. For it is plain that the power of conse- 
cration is given by God to a priest for one end, although he may 
abuse his power for another end. Still it appertains to the 
providence of God not to allow an impious man to abuse the grace 
of miracles to deceive others so as to lead them into heresy, if this 
misuse should be entirely hidden from them. For then men, without 
any fault of their own, and on the authority, as it would appear, 
of God’s attestation would be led into error, which is impossible. 
Neither could God correct or amend their error by another 
mirafle. For men would say that if the first miracle were wrought 
for the confirmation of what is false, by parity of reasoning, the 
second also might be wrought for the confirmation of what is 
false: so that God would, as it were, disarm Himself, and deprive 
Himself of the power of declaring and attesting the truth, and 
confuting error. For this consists in the working of miracles. 
In the case of those whom the common people call Saviours , 
even when they are of evil life, it is plain, says Navarrus in his 
Manuals , that the gift of curing diseases has been given them by 
God for the common good of the Church, and that they can abuse 
this gift for evil purposes. So also in Flanders, they say that 
those who are born on Good Friday, and also a seventh son, 
sprung in continual descent from a seventh son, are able to cure 
the King's Evil by touching it. But the gift is given by God to 
the former in honour of Good Friday, and the mystery of Christ’s 
Death and Passion, and to the latter in honour of wedlock, to 
show that it has been honoured and instituted by God, and raised 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



312 


THE KING’S EVIL, 


by Christ to the dignity of a Sacrament. Wherefore if any should 
use this power for evil, we can see that it is the man who is 
abusing his gift, not God who is co-operating with him for evil. 
Thus it is said that the same power ot curing the King's Evil has 
been given to the kings of England and France, on account of the 
merits of King Edward the Confessor. Indeed, one Tucker, a 
Protestant, wrote a Book about the persons cured of the King's 
Evil, by Elizabeth, late Queen of England. But he is completely 
confuted by Delrio, in Magicis (lib. I, c. 3, 9. 4). 

At any rate up to the present time there is no case on record 
in which it can be shown that any one who had even the habitual 
gift, has wrought a miracle for the confirmation of heresy, or false 
doctrine, unless we choose to allow that Calvin, pretending in con- 
firmation of his heresy to raise a supposed dead man to life, who 
was really alive, God, to punish the deceit, caused the man to die. 
But all such miracles, as it were indications of perfidy, condemn 
heresy and confirm the true faith. 

Ver. 23. — And then will I confess unto them , &c. “I Christ, will 
say unto the false prophets, who have taught and done miracles in 
My Name, in the Judgment Day, I knew you indeed as My 
prophets, who did miracles in My Name : but as My friends and 
sons whom I predestinated to the inheritance of My glory, I know 
you not. That is, I do not love and delight in you, because the 
will and law of My Heavenly Father, which ye taught unto others 
with your mouths, ye have not fulfilled in your deeds. Go ye 
therefore into everlasting fire, because ye have wrought iniquity." 
So says S. Augustine; and S. Gregory says, "Christ deserts 
them as unknown whom He did not know for the merit of their 
lives." ( Horn . 12 in Evangel.') This knowledge therefore of God 
is not speculative, but practical, loving, and affectionate : as we are 
said to know those whom we love, and not to know those whom 
we dislike. 

Ver. 24. — Therefore whosoever heareth these sayings of mine , &c. 
This is the Epilogue by which Christ concludes His lengthy 
Sermon on the Mount. It is as though He said — " Thus far have 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



THE SPIRITUAL HOUSE. 


313 


I taught you how ye ought to live wisely and holily according to 
the will and law of God, if ye wish to arrive at the kingdom of 
God and everlasting happiness. For this is the direct way to 
them, and other way there is none. Wherefore if ye do those 
things which I have taught you, ye shall be like a prudent man who ' 
built Jus house upon the rock . For it will resist all winds and storms 
which rush against it.” 

Christ here alludes to Prov. x. 25, “ As the whirlwind passeth, 
so is the wicked no more; but the righteous is an everlasting 
foundation.” And ix. 1 : “Wisdom hath builded her house, she hath 
hewn out her seven pillars.” 

Observe, the spiritual house ot the soul is the perfection of 
virtues, for as a material house is builded with much labour, and 
rises by degrees with various stones and beams, so is the spiritual 
house built up by various virtues and holy operations, and by long 
labour and slow degrees. The length of the house is long- 
suffering, its breadth is charity, its height, hope. The four walls 
are the four cardinal virtues, viz., Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and 
Temperance. The pavement is humility ; the roof, patience. The 
window is the desire of heavenly glory, through which the light 
of the Gospel finds an entrance. The door is obedience to the 
Commandments. The doorkeeper is holy fear. The watchmen 
are holy angels. The tower is contemplation. The mind or 
intellect is the master of the house. The husband is the will, the 
children are good works. The servants are the senses obedient 
to the mind. The table is Holy Scriptures, the bread is the 
Eucharist, the wine is the Blood of Christ, the living water is the 
Holy Ghost. The oil is mercy. The bed is a quiet and peaceable 
mind. The sacraments are medicine, priests are the physicians. 
The Guests are the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost See 
S. Bernard ( Tract . de interiori Domo). 

Lastly, note here, as against the innovators, that faith, without 
the good works which faith prescribes to be done, will not suffice 
for salvation. For Christ here calls a foundation of sand faith alone 
conceived by hearing preaching, for this faith is like sand, dry and 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



3*4 


BUILDING ON THE ROCK. 


worthless : but the rock He calls faith solidified by good works. 
Note 2, the order which Christ employs. For i, in verse 15, He 
taught the necessity of a right faith and true teachers; 2, in 
verse 21 et seq., the necessity of good works and a holy life. 
Mystically the Rock is Christ, whence the Gloss, “ He builds on 
Christ who does what he hears of Him.” 

And the rain descended, &c. The Arabic has, for its foundations 
were made firm upon the rock . The rain, wind, and rivers are all 
temptations and adversities whatsoever, whether coming from the 
world, the flesh, or the devil. They also mean the condemnation 
which Christ shall pronounce upon the wicked in the Day of 
Judgment. For this is often expressed in Scripture by the words 
storm and tempest , as in Isaiah xxviii. 2, “ Behold the Lord hath a 
mighty and strong one, which as a tempest of hail and a de- 
stroying storm, as a flood of mighty waters overflowing, shall cast 
down to the earth with the hand.” 

He then that is faithful to Christ and His law, being as it were 
founded by fear and love upon a most firm rock, cares not for the 
blasts of persecution, nor the .gales of adulation, nor the zephyrs 
of flattery, nor the north winds of threats, nor the tempest of 
blows, but in his vocation and ministry stands unshaken in God. 
Thus like a crag or a rock, which on every side is beaten by the 
waves of the sea, so he continues unmoved and unsubdued. We 
have an example in S. Peter, who being set firm upon a rock, 
that is, the love of Christ, overcame all adverse things. Where- 
fore when he was commanded by the chiefs of the Sadducees 
Acts iv. 18) to cease from preaching Christ, he answered, “We 
cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard.” 

S. Gregory Nazianzen ( Orat . 28) thus depicts the Christian 
philosopher : “ There is a certain fabulous tree, which the more it 
is cut, the more it flourishes, and rises superior to the knife, which 
lives by death, and is propagated by cutting, and grows by being 
consumed.” This, says the Scholiast, is not a fabulous, but a 
real tree. It is fulfilled in the vine, which, the more it is pruned, 
the more it sprouts and bears fruit. Nazianzen proceeds, “Thus 


Digitized by CjOOQle 



BUILDING ON THE SAND. 


3 T S 


of d truth is the philosopher. He flourishes amid torments ; and 
he deems the troubles of life to be the harvest of virtue, and 
glories in adversity/' And he concludes by showing that there 
are three things which are invincible — namely, God, an angel, and 
a philosopher. Two of these cannot be severed, or plucked 
asunder, God and an angel. The third is a philosopher ; in 
matter devoid of matter, uncircumscribed by the body, heavenly 
while on earth, impassible amid sufferings, easily giving himself to 
be overcome by all things, except that through greatness of mind, 
in that wherein he suffers himself to be overcome, he overcomes 
those who seem to have overcome him. 

Ver. 26. — And whoso heareth these sayings of mine , &c. Rightly is 
the instability and disobedience of him who heareth the words of 
Christ and doeth them not likened unto sand. For, I. Sand is 
soft and shifting, so that it cannot afford a solid and durable foun- 
dation. 2. Sand is dry ; and so the unstable mind which doeth 
not that which it heareth is dry and empty of virtue and the 
moisture of the Divine Spirit. 3. Sand is blown about by the 
wind and dispersed into all quarters ; so too a light and inconstant 
mind is carried into every sort of concupiscence by every breath of 
desire and temptation. 4. As sand is very fine and composed of 
millions of little grains, so the unstable heart is filled with a 
thousand cogitations and desires after vain and trifling things. 

Tropologically , the foolish and worldly person builds upon sand, 
i.e. f says Salmeron, upon creatures, who like sand are barren for 
good, and in a state of fluidity, so as to fall away into sin, and 
shaken by the waves because they are agitated by labours and 
temptations. For as sand is dry, or bibulous and insatiable, so 
creatures cannot satisfy the soul of man. Sand is also very 
numerous ; so likewise the wicked are innumerable, and “ infinite 
is the company of fools/' Sand therefore denotes all the people 
of the devil — sterile, and by no means united, whereas the people 
of God are strong and united like a rock. For though many be 
called, few are chosen. 

And the rain descended \ &c. Rain denotes the temptation of the 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



3i6 


POINTS OF DIFFERENCE BETWEEN 


world; rivers, of the flesh; the winds, of the devil. For rain 
coming down from on high, and causing the earth to swell and 
making it fruitful, denotes ambition of honours and the desire of 
wealth, which the world offers to the vain and inconstant man, 
whereby he is made to depart from the law of God, and fall away 
from the faith. Rivers, or floods which arise out of the earth, 
denote the temptations of the flesh, as gluttony and lust, which 
have their origin in the flesh itself, so to say. Winds, which from 
the atmosphere blow against the house laterally and invisibly, 
denote the temptations of the devil, who is an invisible spirit, and 
the prince of the power of the air. For he insinuates, and as it 
were blows into our fancy a thousand depraved thoughts and 
desires, and they are so subtil that sometimes thou knowest not 
whether they come from an angel, or the devil. For Satan 
transforms himself into an angel of light. 

Ver. 28. — And it came to pass , Ac. Here then is concluded 
Christ's whole Sermon upon the Mount, containing the whole law 
and perfection of the Gospel. And although the precepts given 
are dispersed, yet are they all connected. And if any one desires 
to learn the order and connection which exists amongst them 
let him read Bellarminc (lib. 4, de Justiftc.) 

For he taught them , Ac. That is, He was accustomed to teach , Ac. 
1. Because Christ taught important matters with great authority, 
matters of the highest moment for salvation, and the Truth itself. 
But the Scribes taught with levity, trifling matters, such as rites 
and ceremonies, washings of the hands and of cups. 

2. Because what Christ taught in word, that He fufilled in 
deed. For great authority is added to the doctrine of the teacher 
when he performs the good which he enjoins. “Protracted," 
says Seneca, “ is the road to virtue through precepts ; short and 
effectual through example." Here S. Gregory (23 Moved . 7) : “ That 
is indeed taught with authority which is acted before it is spoken. 
For we take away from confidence in our doctrine when con- 
science impedes the tongue. Whence also it is written of the 
Lord, ‘He taught as one having authority, and not as the Scribes.' 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



CHRIST'S TEACHING AND THAT OF THE SCRIBES. 3 I 7 

For peculiarly and above all He spoke only from a good power, 
because He had done no evil through weakness. From the power 
of His Divinity He had that which He ministered unto us through 
the innocence of His humility. 

3. Christ taught with great spirit and fervour, with great 
persuasive force and efficacy; the Scribes coldly and super- 
ficially. 

4. Christ confirmed His doctrine by miracles, which the Scribes 
could not do. Again Christ had a marvellous grace in speaking, 
according to those words of S. Matthew, “ They wondered at the 
gracious words which proceeded out of His mouth.” 

5. The Scribes taught as interpreters of the Law, but Christ as 
a Lawgiver sent from heaven, with celestial wisdom and majesty. 
So Bede and Theophylact. 

6. Christ in His teaching aimed only at the glory of God and 
the salvation of man. The Scribes sought their own glory and the 
applause of men. 

7. Christ by His external teaching, and by His holy interior 
inspiration, and the light of grace, illuminated the minds and 
inflamed the affections of His hearers, and thereby made ignorant 
and stupid men learned, and those who were torpid and frigid 
fervent. 

In these things then let the orator and preacher imitate Christ, 
and let him teach more by his life than his words, like S. Basil, of 
whom S. Gregory Nazianzen writes (Ora/. 20), “A sermon of 
Basil’s was like thunder, because his life was like lightning.” S. 
Bernard, in his Life of S. Malachi, says that upon one occasion 
he rendered a certain enraged and furious woman, whose temper 
was perfectly intolerable to every one, so meek, that she did not 
even appear angry. And this he did by a word, saying to her, 

« In the name of the Lord Jesus, I bid thee be no longer angry.” 
And this, S. Bernard thinks, was a greater miracle than raising a 
man from the dead, which was once performed by the same S. 
Malachi. “For in the one case it was but the outward man 
who lived again, in the other case it was the inward man.” 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


CHAPTER VIII, 


2 Christ clean seth the leper, 5 healeth the centurion's servant , 14 Peters mother 

in law , 16 and many other diseased : 18 skeweth how he is to be followed: 23 
stilleth the tempest on the sea, 28 driveth the devils out of two men possessed , 31 
and suffereth them to go into the swine. 

W HEN he was come down from the mountain, great multitudes followed 
him. 

2 And, behold, there came a leper and worshipped him, saying, Lord, if thou 
wilt, thou can st make me clean. 

3 And Jesus put forth his hand, and touched him, saying, I will ; be thou 
clean. And immedialely his leprosy was cleansed. 

4 And Jesus saiih unto him, See thou tell no man ; but go thy way, shew thy- 
self to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded, for a tes imony unto 
them. 

5 And when Jesus was entered into Capernaum, there came unto him a 
centurion, beseeching him, 

6 And saying, Lord, my servant lieth at home sick of the palsy, grievously 
tormented. 

7 And Jesus saith unto him, 1 will come and heal him. 

8 The centurion answered and said, Lo.d, 1 am not worthy that thou 
shouldest come under my roof: but speak the word only, and my servant shall be 
healed. 

9 For I am a man under authority, having soldiers under me: and I say to 
this man. Go, and he goeth ; and to another, Come, and he cometh ; and to my 
servant. Do this, and he doeth it. 

10 When Jesus heard it, he marvelled, and said to them that followed. Verily 
I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel. 

II And 1 say unto you, That many shall come from the east and west, and 
gl»nl1 sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven. 

t2 But the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness: there 
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



319 


13 And Jesus said unto the cen urion, Go thy way ; and as thou hast be*, 
iie ed, so be it done unto thee. And his servant was healed in the self-same 
hour. 

1 4 And when Jesus was come into Peter’s house, he saw his wife’s mother laid, 
and sick of a fever. 

1$ And he touched her hand, and the fever left her : and she arose, and minis- 
tered unto them. 

16 When the even was come, they brought unto him many that were pos- 
sessed with devils : and he cast out the spirits with his word, and healed all 
that were sick: 

1 7 That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying. 
Himself took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses. 

18 Now when Jesus saw great multitudes about him, he gave commandment 
to dep.m unto the other side. 

19 And a certain scribe came, and said unto him, Master, I will follow thee 
whithersoever thou goest 

20 And Jesus saith unto him. The foxes have holes and the birds of the air 
have nests ; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head. 

21 And another of his disciples said unto him, Lord, suffer me first to go and 
bury my father. 

22 But Jesus raid unto him. Follow me ; and let the dead bury their dead. 

23 And when he was entered into a ship, his disciples followed him. 

?4 And behold, there arose a great tempest in the sea, insomuch that the ship 
was covered with the waves : but he was asleep, 

' 25 And his disciples came to him, and awoke him, saying, Lord, save us : we 
peiish. 

26 And he saith unto them, Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith ? Then he 
arose, and rebuked the winds and the sea ; and there was a great calm. 

27 But the men marvelled, saying, What manner of man is this, that even the 
winds and the sea obey him ? 

28 And when he was come to the other side, into the country of the Gergesenes, 
there met him two po sessed with devils, coming out of the tombs, exceeding 
fierce, so that no man might pass by that way. 

29 And, behold, they cried out, saying, What have we to do with thee, Jesus, 
thou Son of God ? art thou come hither to torment us before the time? 

30 And there was a good way off from them an herd of many swine feeding. 

31 So the devils besought him, saying, If thou cast us out, suffer us to go away 
into the herd of swine. 

32 And he said unto them, Go* And when they were come out, they went 
into the herd of swine : and, behold, the whole herd of swine ran violently down 
a steep place into the sea, and perished in the waters : 

33 And they that kept them fled, and went their ways into the city, and told 
every thing, and what was befallen to the possessed of the devils. 

34 And, behold, the whole city came out to meet Jesus : and when they saw 
him, they besought him that he would depart out of their coasts. 

Ver. 2. — And, dehold, a leper, &c. This same miracle is related by 
S. Mark (i. 40), and by Luke (v. 12). From a comparison of these 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


320 


LEPROSY. 


it would seem to follow that the miracle was not performed imme- 
diately upon our Lord's descent, at the very toot of the mountain, 
for Luke says that it came to pass in one of the cities . And both 
Mark and Luke speak of other miracles as previously performed. 
But S. Matthew's narrative appears to be the most chronological, 
according to which it may be said that this miracle was the first 
which Christ wrought after His descent. So S. Jerome, Jansen, 
and others. As to what S. Luke says, that, it took place in one of 
the cities , we must understand, near the city . For by the law lepers 
were ordered to be kept entirely apart, and were forbidden to enter 
towns and camps, lest the inhabitants should catch the disease. 
Some think that the Levitical law only forbade lepers living in 
towns, but not their passing through them, so that this leper 
might have been cleansed by Christ as he was passing through 
this city. This city, as may be gathered from the fifth verse, was 
Capernaum. 

How great, how incurable and contagious, a disease was 
leprosy is plain from hence, that lepers, both by the ancient law 
and the usage of all nations, were debarred from consorting 
with their fellow men. For in lepers there is a contagion which 
spreads by contact with the whole, whom they are able to infect 
by the stench of their ulcers and their fetid breath. With them, 
by the contagion and the infection of the disease, the face is dis- 
figured. the hair falls off, the nostrils are enlarged, the bones are 
eaten away, and the tongue swells, in short, every kind of disease, 
and all their symptoms, are found as the accompaniment of 
leprosy. Physicans teach that it may be considered an elephantine 
disease, and incurable. How, says Avicenna, can leprosy be 
cured, since it is an universal cancer, when even a single cancer 
is beyond the power of medicine ? Moreover, hot and stony 
and salt regions, and such as are exposed to excessive vicissitudes 
of cold and heat, are peculiarly liable to this disease. Such 
regions were Palestine and a part of Egypt. Wherefore Galen 
says, " In Alexandria many labour under elephantia (leprosy) 
as well on account of their way of living as of the heat." 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



TOUCHING THE LEPER. 


321 


Worshipped \ *.*., falling- down upon his knees and face, for S. 
Mark adds yowircrw) i.e . 9 falling at his knees. The leper did 
this not with the design of rendering Him civil honour, but that 
he might give to Christ the highest worship of religion, as is 
plain from his so humble and believing petition. For he did 
not request Christ to ask God, as Moses did, but If Thou art 
willing , Thou art able to make me clean . As though he had said, I know 
that Thou hast the power of God, and therefore dominion over 
diseases, so that Thou canst control leprosy by the right of a 
master, and canst, by Thy command alone, drive it from me. I 
ask Thee, therefore, that thou wouldst deign to do this. For if 
Thou wilt, the thing is done, and I am healed. So S. Chrysostom 
says, “ To the spiritual physician, he offers spiritual hire — viz., 
believing prayer, than which nothing of more worth can be offered 
to God.” Also the Interlinear Gloss says, “ To will He adds the 
attribute of power, for as great as His will so great is the power 
of God. For whatsoever He wills, that He is forthwith able to 
perform. According to the words of the Psalmist, “ Whatsover the 
Lord willed, that did he in heaven and earth.” (Ps. cxxxv. 6 , 
Vulg.) This leper therefore had faith in the Divinity of Christ, 
partly from His inward illumination and inspiration, partly from 
His miracles, several of which Christ had already performed in 
this first year of His preaching. For this leper was healed in 
the second year, as I have said in the Chronoiaxis , nu. 22. Again, 
the words, if Thou wilt, denote the desire of being healed, mingled 
with resignation. For he resigns himself to the will of Christ, 
that if He wishes it, he may be cured ; if He be unwilling, he may 
remain unhealed. 

And Jesus pul forth his hand \ &c. Touched him, that He might 
show that He was above the law, which forbade contact with 
the leper. The law forbade this touching of a leper from fear 
of contagion. But there was no danger of such contagion 
in Christ's case, but rather the certainty of healing the leper. 
When, therefore, Christ touched the leper, He did not do so as 
against the law, but rather as fulfilling the spirit of the law. 

v 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



322 


HZANl »G OF CHRIST'S 44 I WILL.” 

2. lie touched him out of kindness, that He might show His 
love for the leper. 

3. He touched him, says S. Cyril, that the saving efficacy of 
the Flesh of Christ might be made manifest. Whence Victor 
of Antioch, on S. Mark (chap, i.), says, 44 The Word, willing 
to show forth Its indivisible union with the Flesh, wrought 
magy miracles and signs through the ministry of the body.” 
And Bede says, “God stretched forth His hand, and touched 
human nature by His Incarnation, and brought back to the 
Temple those who were cast out of the camp of the people of 
God (the lepers), that they might offer their bodies a living 
sacrifice to Himself, to whom it is said, 4 Thou art a priest for ever 
after the order of Melchizedek .' 99 

I will , be thou clean . From these words the Fathers prove the 
Divinity of Christ and His omnipotence. Maldonatus cites them 
at length. Thus S. Ambrose: “He saith, 4 1 will/ because of 
Photinus, He commands on account of Arius, He touches on 
account of Manichaeus.” For Photinus taught that Christ was a 
mere man, and not God, whose attribute is an almighty will, by 
which, he says, 44 1 will, be thou clean.” Arius taught that Christ 
was inferior to the Father, and, therefore, did not Himself com- 
mand, but received the Father’s commandments. Manichaeus 
taught that Christ had not real flesh, but only in appearance, such 
as could not in reality either touch or be touched. 

And immediately , &c. There was no interval between Christ's 
command and its fulfilment. He spoke and all things were made, 
because His will was omnipotent. (Genesis i.) The Arabic 
translates, the man was cleansed from his leprosy : for the words, the 
leprosy was cleansed, are a figure of speech. By this miracle Christ 
shows that He tame into the world as a physician that He might 
heal all diseases and purge away all filthiness. 

And Jesus saith unto him . (S. Mark, threatened , i.e. t commanded 
him with a severe and stern countenance.) He did this to avoid 
ostentation, and to teach us not to boast of our virtues and gifts, 
but rather conceal them. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



SACRAMENT OF PENANCE. 


323 


But go, show thyself to the priest ; Mark has to the high priest . 
“He sends him to the priests,” says S. Jerome, “on account of 
humility, that He may appear to show deference to them, so that 
they henceforth might either believe and be saved, or else be held 
without excuse ; and, lastly, that He might not be accounted to 
violate the law. 

The gift which was to be offered to the priest by lepers who 
were cleansed was a lamb, or, if the leper were poor, two turtle 
doves, or two young pigeons. (Lev. xiv. 13, &c .) 

For a testimony unto them , sc. the priests. By the word testimony , 
some understand the law, as though He had said, “ Offer the gift 
enjoined, that thou mayest fulfil the law which Moses commanded." 
For in the 1 19th Psalm the law is often called by the name of 
testimony . That is to say, it is the Divine will, which God testifies 
that He would have done by us. There is, however, no reason 
why testimony should not be taken in its ordinary acceptation. 

This then was the testimony which the leper gave to the priests 
that he was cleansed from his leprosy, namely, an ocular inspec- 
tion of his body and his limbs, which was made by them. And 
if they saw that he was healed, they accepted his gift as a thank- 
offering to God ; but if he were not healed they refused it. 

Tropologically , leprosy signifies mortal sin, especially that which 
is contagious, such as heresy is in an especial manner, because of 
its extreme foulness and infectious nature. So S. Augustine (lib. 
2, Quasi. Evan., quasi. 40), Theodoret, Radulphus, and others, on 
Levit. xiv. Hence the cleansing of leprosy is the symbol of the 
sacrament of penance, and of sacramental confession, whereby 
sins are forgiven. From this type, S. Jerome on the sixteenth 
chapter of S. Matthew proves the power and efficacy of this 
sacrament against the heretics, showing how the priests must be 
cognisant of the various kinds and varieties of sins. S. Chrysostom 
(lib. 3, de Sacerdoiio) does the same, teaching that the office of a 
Christian priest is far more powerful and excellent than was that 
of a priest of the order of Aaron, because to these latter it was not 
granted to heal leprosy, but only to declare that it was healed, 

Y 2 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



324 


CHRIST AS A LEPER. 


whilst to the former it is given not merely to declare that sins are 
forgiven, but really to cleanse and absolve them. And this was 
the reason why, when Christ came down from the mount, where 
He had taught the Evangelical Law, He willed that His first 
miracle should be the cleansing of the leper, chiefly because the 
various stages of leprosy best represent the foulness and plague 
of sin, and the cleansing of leprosy the forgiveness of sins. And 
so Christ in His Passion assumed the appearance of a leper, that 
He might take upon Himself and heal the leprosy of our souls. 
Wherefore Isaiah says (liii. 4), *' Surely He Himself hath borne 
our sicknesses, and carried our griefs ; and we esteemed Him as 
though He were a leper, stricken of God, and humiliated. But 
He was wounded for our iniquities; He was bruised for our 
wickednesses/' (V ulg.) See what I have said on leprosy on Lev. 
xiii. and xiv. This was why Christ appeared to the monk 
Martyrius in the form of a leper, and suffered Himself to be 
carried on his shoulders to the gates of his monastery, where He 
disappeared. Yet did not Martyrius feel His weight, because 
Christ bore him who carried Him, as S. Gregory says {Horn. 30 in 
Evang.). Christ appeared in the same form of a leper to S. Louis, 
Bishop of Toulouse, who was a grandson of S. Louis, King of 
France, as is related in his Life. 

And when he was come into Capernaum , &c. This was the second 
miracle by which Christ confirmed His teaching upon the hiount, 
as S. Jerome says. This is the passage from which we gather that 
the city near to which the leper was healed was Capernaum, as I 
have already said. Moreover, the leper was a Jew, and the cen- 
turion was a Gentile — probably a Roman, a captain of 100 men 
or more. L. Dexter, in his Chronicle, lately published, says that 
this centurion was Caius Cornelius, a Spanish centurion, the father 
of Caius Oppias, also a centurion, who stood beside Christ on the 
cross, and beheld the signs which were done in heaven, and the 
sun, and the earth, and the rocks, and was converted to Christ, 
Both father and son afterwards preached the Gospel in Judaea 
and Spain. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



NATURE OF PARALYSIS. 


325 


Came to him. There is an antilogy here ; for Luke (vii. 1) relates 
the same miracle differently. He does not say that the centurion 
himself came to Christ, but sent to Him, first Jews, then his 
friends, to ask the favour of Him that He would heal His servant 
Wherefore in S. Luke we must supply from S. Matthew, that after 
his friends, the centurion himself, last of all, came to Christ, either 
for the sake of doing Him honour, or because of the urgency of 
the disease, and the imminent peril of death. This is the opinion 
of S. Chrysostom ( Horn . 26), Theophylact, and Euthymius. Or you 
may suppose that the centurion is here said to have come to 
Christ, and besought and answered Him, not personally, but by 
his friends. This is the opinion of S. Augustine and Bede. 

Heal my servant . Greek, boy : for servants were under subjection, 
and were bound to render obedience and reverence, like sons. 
Moreover, this servant was dear and precious to the centurion, as 
Luke says. 

Lieth at home sick of the palsy . That was, says S. Hilary, “ like 
a corpse in a bed, with all his limbs useless — unable to stand, or 
do anything.” Paralysis, says Celsus, is an unstringing of the 
nerves. It is a disease in which half the body is dead, without 
the power of motion or feeling. And so Galen says ( Comment . 
lib. 4). It is called hemiplexia , t\e, 9 semi-apoplexy, because it 
affects half the body; for when the whole body is similarly 
affected, it is called apoplexy . 

Grievously tormented \ and so at the point of death, as S. Luke 
says. For this was sudden and acute paralysis. There are other 
slow forms of paralysis, which are without this excessive torture 
and immediate danger. The torment here spoken of seems to 
have been convulsion and drawing up of the nerves, which have 
their origin in the brain. For when they are unnaturally twisted 
and stretched, they cause intense anguish, as William Ader 
shows, from Galen (lib. de eEgrotis etMorbis a Christo smaiis t c. 2), in 
which work Addr shows that those sick persons were despaired 
of, and incurable by natural means, and were therefore reserved 
by God for Christ, as the Arch-physician. Such an one was this 


Digitized by CjOOQle 



326 


EXPLANATION OF DISCREPANCIES. 


paralytic. S. Ambrose says the same thing ( Epist . 75), “The 
Lord Jesus saved those whom no one else was able to cure." 

There is, in the account of this miracle, a second antilogy. S. 
Luke says, When he heard of Jesus he sent unto him the elders of the 
Jews , &c. Luke says, he asked him to come ; whilst Matthew, and 
indeed Luke himself, relate what seems a contradiction of this, 
in his saying, Lord \ I am not worthy that Thou shouldst enter under my 
roof but speak the word only . The explanation is, that the words 
asked and sent , so far as they relate to the word come , apply to the 
Jewish ambassadors of the centurion. They had less faith and 
humility than the centurion, who only asked through them that 
Christ would heal his servant; but the Jews added of themselves 
the request that He would come and heal him by touching him. 
And so, by means of the elders, he asked Jesus to come. For 
what the ambassador saith, that he who sent the ambassador is 
reckoned to say. Luke, therefore, after his manner, for the sake 
of brevity, rolls together what was done and said by the Jews and 
the centurion, without distinguishing or separating one from the 
other. 

Others give a different explanation, namely, that when the 
centurion sent the Jews, he sent them to ask Christ to come and 
heal his servant ; but after they had gone, being illuminated by 
God, and his faith and humility having increased, he repented of 
what he had done, and desired and asked that Christ, without 
being present, would heal him. But this W’ould be inconsistent 
with what is said in Luke vii. 7, where the centurion, through the 
Jews, is reported to have said at the first, Wherefore also, I thought 
not myself worthy to come unto thee. For if he had thought himself 
worthy that Christ should come unto him, much more would he 
have thought himself worthy to come unto Christ. 

Ver. 8. — Say in a word only. Meaning, There is no need that 
Thou shouldst be present to touch my servant ; but though Thou 
art absent, give the command, and my servant will be imme- 
diately healed. The centurion therefore believed that Christ was 
God who is everywhere present, and commandeth and worketh 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



WONDER AS SPOKEN 07 CHRIST. 


327 


whatsoever He will, or at least, that Christ was an extraordinary 
prophet, and most dear to God — in other words, the Messiah 
promised to the Jews, who, in God's name in Judaea, ordered ail 
thing's according to His own will. 

For I also am a man under authority , Ac. If I have authority over 
a few soldiers, so that they obey my behests, how much more, O 
Christ, who hast power over all things, canst Thou make diseases 
obey Thee? Or, if I, who am placed under the authority of my 
tribune and of Caesar, can yet give my orders to the soldiers 
under me, how much more canst Thou, O Christ, who art under 
the power of none, but art God omnipotent and Lord of all, do 
whatsoever Thou wilt ? so that even if absent Thou shouldst say 
to the disease, I mean my servant's palsy, Go away , immediately 
it will depart : if Thou shouldst say, Come, straightway it would 
come. For diseases are, as it were, Thy ministers and satellites, 
whom Thou at a nod sendest upon the guilty, and whom, when 
sinners repent and are suppliant, Thou recallest. S. Jerome 
commends the faith of the centurion, who, though he was a 
Gentile, believed that one who was paralytic could be healed by 
the Saviour; his humility, in that he deemed himself unworthy 
that He should come under his roof ; his prudence, because he 
beheld the Divinity lying hid beneath Its corporeal veil, for he 
knew that not that which was seen, even by unbelievers, could 
help him, but that which was within, which was unseen. 

When Jesus heard , he marvelled . Whence Origen says, “ Consider 
how great a thing, and what sort of thing, that was which the 
Only-Begotten God marvels at. Gold, riches, kingdoms, princi- 
palities in His sight are as shadows, or as fading flowers. None 
of these things therefore in His sight are wonderful, as though 
they were great or precious. Faith alone is such : this He 
honours and admires : this He counts acceptable to Himself." 

You will ask, could wonder really exist in Christ ? I would 
lay down that in Christ, according to the common opinion of 
theologians, besides that Divine knowledge which He had as God, 
there was a threefold knowledge, as He was man. I. Beatific , by 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


328 


THE CENTURION’S FAITH 


which He beheld the essence of God, and in the enjoyment of 
which He was blessed 2. Infused \ by which, through the appear- 
ances sent into His soul by God, at the very moment of His Con- 
ception, He knew all things. 3. Experimental , by which those 
things which He understood by infused knowledge, He daily saw, 
heard, and understood experimentally. 

I answer therefore, that in Christ wonder did not exist properly 
and absolutely, as something which flows from the depths of the 
heart. For wonder arises in us when we see or hear something 
new. But Christ, by means of infused knowledge, knew all 
things before they were done. Since therefore He was omni- 
scient, nothing was to Him new, unknown, unexpected, or wonder- 
ful. Christ, however, stirred up in Himself, as it were, by experi- 
mental knowledge, when He met with anything new or wonderful, 
a certain, as it were, interior act of wonder, and the outward 
expression of that wonder, that so He might teach others to 
marvel at the same. Thus S. Augustine (lib. 1. de Gen . contra 
ManicJuRos ) : “ Who indeed, save Himself, had wrought in the 
man that very faith at which He marvelled ? But even if another 
had wrought it, why should He marvel who had foreknowledge ? 
That the Lord wondered signifies that we must wonder, for whom 
it is needful as yet that we should thus be moved. But all such 
movements in Christ are signs, not of a perturbed mind, but of 
one teaching authoritatively." So also S. Thomas. Very well 
saith S. Cyprian (Tract, de Spectaculis), “ Never will he wonder at 
human works who has known himself to be a child of God. He 
has been cast down from the height of his nobility, who is able to 
admire anything after God." 

And he said to them which foll/wed \ &c. When Christ says, I have 
not found so great faith , no, not in Israel , you must understand Him 
to speak of the ordinary run of people at the time of His preach- 
ing, for there was without doubt greater faith in the Blessed 
Virgin, in Abraham and Moses, and John the Baptist, and others. 
Or as S. Chrysostom, I have not found so great faith , that is, in pro- 
portion, for this centurion was a Gentile ; those were believing 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



GREAT BY COMPARISON. 329 

Israelites. The same S. Chrysostom prefers the faith of the 
centurion to the faith of the Apostles at their first vocation. 
Hear S. Chrysostom: “ Andrew believed, but it was when John 
said, Behold the Lamb of God. Peter believed, but it was when 
Andrew had told him the glad tidings of the Gospel. Philip 
believed, but by reading the Scriptures. And Nathanael first 
received a sign of Christ's Divinity, and then offered the profession 
of his faith.” Hear likewise Origen : “ Jairus, a prince of Israel, 
asking in behalf of his daughter, said not, Say in a word ’ but 
Com quickly . Nicodemus, when he heard of the Sacrament of 
faith, answered, How can these things be ? Martha and Mary 
said, Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died, as 
though doubting that the power of God is everywhere present.” 

But I say unto you , Ac. Christ here predicts the calling of the 
Gentiles, and the rejection of the Jews. He alludes to Isaiah 
xliii. 5, Ac., where is predicted the calling of the Gentiles from 
the four quarters of the earth, their grace and glory. Shall sit 
down *>., shall rest , says S. Hilary. But the Greek is faaxXtBfrwra^ 
i.e.y shall lie down as on a triclinium , or couch. They shall 
feast as guests at a magnificent entertainment. For to this the 
kingdom of heaven, and the felicity of Christ and His saints, is 
often compared, because of their perfect joy, security, and satis* 
faction. There is an allusion to Ps. xvii. 1 5, “ When thy glory 
shall appear, I shall be satisfied” (Vulg.) ; and Ps. xxxvi. 8, 
“ They shall be inebriated with the richness of thine house, and 
thou shalt give them to drink from the torrent of thy pleasure” 

(Vulg.)- 

But the children of the kingdom , Ac., />., destined and called to 
the kingdom as being Israelites, as being the progeny of 
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, to whose seed God had promised 
both the earthly kingdom of Judah, and the spiritual kingdom of 
eternal glory in heaven. By a similar Hebrew idiom, they are 
called children of death, of hell, of the resurrection, to whom 
death or hell is threatened, or to whom the resurrection has been 
promised. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



330 


ANCIENT FEASTS. 


Into the outer darkness , of hell. Christ still keeps up the metaphor 
of a feast in the kingdom of heaven, a feast therefore in which 
was abundance of light. Observe that most of the ancients did 
not dine, or at least out very sparingly, alter the manner of a 
lunch, but made supper their chief meal, at which they fed 
heartily, and were hilarious. And this was the time when they 
made their feasts, because then they had ease and leisure. For 
they did this, as Horace says, not to break into the day. 

Hence the triclinia , where feasts were made, were called supper- 
rooms. It is plain that this was the custom among the Hebrews 
from the constant mention in Holy Scripture of supper and supptr 
chatnbers , but rarely of dinner. Examples are the supper of 
Darius (3 Esdr. iii. 1), of Holofemes (Judith xii. 5), of Herod 
(Mark vi. 21), &c. In the Old Testament there is no mention of 
dinner except in Tobit ii. I, Daniel xiii. 13, and Esther, when the 
Jews had been carried away to Assyria and Babylon, where they 
followed the customs of the Gentiles, and ate as those nations did. 
I except Jeroboam I., king of Israel, who invited the prophet who 
restored his hand home to dine with him. ( 1 Kings xiii. 7.) But 
this king was an idolater, the maker of the golden calves which 
the Israelites worshipped. So that it is not at all strange that he 
should affect gluttonous feasts. 

Moreover, the first Christians were wont to fast until eventide, 
as Tertullian shows (lib. I de Jejun. c. 10). Indeed, as late as the 
time of S. Thomas Aquinas, who flourished a.d. 1270, it was 
customary to fast until three o’clock in the afternoon, when Christ 
expired upon the cross. And he who took food before that hour 
was considered not to have fasted, according to a decree of the 
Council of Cabillon. (See D. Thomas 2. 2. quasi. 147, art. 7, 
where, however, Chalcedon has crept in instead of Cabillon.) 

Since, then, they did not dine at midday, but supped at night, 
there was abundance of light at the ancient feasts, as Virgil 
says : — 

“ From golden roofs the lamps depend, 

And darkness from the guests defend.” 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



DUr? TO SERVANTS. 


331 

With the guests, then, and in the supper- hall, was light, but 
without was darkness, which is here called the outer darkness — 
that is, outside the banquet. 

The meaning of the passage is : the children of the kingdom 
the Jews, destined, for the sake of their fathers, Abraham, Isaac, 
and Jacob, to the kingdom of heaven, on account of their unbelief, 
in refusing to believe in Christ, shall be excluded from the royal 
and heavenly feast, and shall be driven into the outer darkness 
of hell. 

Jesus saith unio the centurion , &c. From this it would appear that 
Christ had not gone into the centurion’s house, nor touched his 
servant ; but in the very place where the centurion met Him, there 
He healed the sick man, that He might confirm his master in the 
faith that He was the Messiah — yea, that He might show Himself 
to be God; for great faith gains great rewards, great confidence 
gains great things. As much as thou expectest from God, so 
much shalt thou obtain. Whence S. Bernard (on Ps. Qui habitat , 
Serm. 15), explaining tropologically God’s words to Joshua — 
" Whatsoever place the soles of your feet shall tread upon shall 
be yours ” — says, “ Hope in the Lord, all ye congregation of the 
people; all that your feet tread upon shall be yours; for your 
foot is your hope.” 

Let masters learn from this narrative what great care they 
ought to bestow upon their servants, and how dear they ought to 
be to them. So dear was this servant to the centurion, that he 
employed the aid of the elders and his friends to call Christ to heal 
him. So too, in turn, ought servants to obey their masters with the 
greatest zeal, love, and reverence. Wisely saith Seneca, although 
he was a heathen (. Epist . 47), “ Are they servants? Still they are 
men. Are they servants ? Still they belong to thy family. Are 
they servants? Yet they are thy fellow-servants, if thou con- 
siderest how both are in the power of fortune.” And then he 
gives examples of servants who had been well treated by their 
masters, who were prepared to lay down their lives for them, if 
by so doing they could avert danger from them. Wherefore that 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



332 


ORDER OF THE NARRATIVE. 


common saying* is false, “As many servants, so many enemies.’* 
“ For/’ saith he, “we do not have them as enemies, but we make 
them enemies, by treating them unkindly.” Wherefore let all 
masters and superiors act towards their dependents as this cen- 
turion acted towards his servant, especially by bringing them to 
Christ, to be healed of the diseases of their souls, if not of their 
bodies. 

Mystically , the centurion is every one who rules over his mem- 
bers, senses, and faculties, so that they, as it were soldiers, may 
fight for and serve God. 

And when he uas come into Peter" s house, &c. We have here an 
inverted order of the narrative, for this miracle, and the other 
works of Christ which Matthew proceeds to relate, as far as the 
end of chap. ix. took place before the healing of the leper and the 
centurion's servant, before, indeed, the Sermon on the Mount, as 
may be gathered from Mark i. 23 and 29, Lukeiv. 32 and 38, and, 
indeed, from S. Matthew himself. For the Sermon on the Mount 
was delivered in the hearing of the Twelve Apostles, and there- 
fore of S. Matthew himself. Yet he relates his vocation subse- 
quently to this, in be. 9. The reason is, that Matthew wished to 
give, at the commencement of Christ's preaching, a summary of 
His doctrine, and then to relate in order His miracles, both those 
which He wrought before His sermon, and those which He 
wrought afterwards, in confirmation of His doctrine. The true 
order of the narrative is, then, as follows, as may be learnt by 
comparing Mark and Luke. After Christ had called Peter and 
Andrew from their fishing to follow Him, as Matthew relates (iv. 
18), He entered into Capernaum. There He preached in the 
synagogue, and healed the demoniac. From thence He proceeded 
to Peter's house, and healed his mother-in-law. This miracle, 
therefore, and the others which follow to the end of chap, ix 
ought, according to chronological sequence, to be inserted in 
chap, iv., immediately after ver. 22. 

Into Peter's house , which belonged to Peter and Andrew, as we 
find in S. Mark i. 29. This house was at Bethsaida, the native 


Digitized by C.ooQle 



8. PETRONILLA. 


333 


place of Peter. (See John i. 44.) Bethsaida was close to 
Capernaum, about half-an-hour's journey. Or it may be that this 
was Peter’s wife's mother's house, and that she lived in Caper- 
naum itself, and that Peter was wont to call in there. For Mark 
and Luke seem to intimate that this miracle was wrought in 
Capernaum. The mention of this mother-in-law shows that Peter 
was called in marriage by Christ, and that he left his wife and a 
daughter, who in time to come, from her father, Peter, was called 
Petronilla. None of the Apostles, except Peter, are spoken of in 
the Gospels as having a wife. Peter’s wife was called Perpetua, 
says Molanus, although others called her Concordia, and others 
again, Mary. In after time, when she had been converted to 
Christ, and was being led to martyrdom for her faith in Him, she 
was strengthened by S. Peter, who said, “ O spouse, remember the 
Lord." This is related by Clement of Alexandria ( Strom . lib. 2). 
Petronilla, on account of her great beauty, was sought in mar- 
riage by a nobleman named Flaccus. She asked for three days 
to deliberate. The term being expired, she received Holy Com- 
munion from the priest Nicomede, after which she gave up her 
soul to God, and is reckoned among the Virgin Saints. Her 
name occurs in the Calendar on the last day of May, and her 
relics are still preserved at Rome, in the Basilica of S. Peter. 

Sick of a freer; a great fever , says S. Luke. Tropologically , the 
fever of the soul is the fire of concupiscence, the burning heat of lust, 
of gluttony, of pride, of envy, &c. Listen to S. Ambrose (lib. 4 
in Luc . c. 4, ver. 38). “ Under the type of Simon's wife’s mother, 

our flesh languishes under the fevers of various spiritual sicknesses, 
and is tempest-tossed by the varied enticements of immoderate 
desires. The fever of love, I may say, is no less than of heat The 
one inflames the mind, the other the body. Our avarice is a fever, 
our lust is a fever. Hence the Apostle says, ‘If they cannot contain 
let them marry, for it is better to marry than to burn.' ” He sub- 
joins the example of Theotimus, who, being told by his physicians 
that if he married he would lose his sight exclaimed, “Farewell, 
dear light." 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



334 


CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN 


Christ comes as the heavenly physician to quench the heat of 
this fever of concupiscence within us by the dew of His grace, that 
grace which must be incessantly implored by those who are 
thus fevered in soul. 

Whosoever then thou art # who labourest under the fever of con- 
cupiscence, I do not say that thou shouldst embrace a monastic life, 
or that thou shouldst macerate thy body by hair shirts or the 
scourge, or drink nothing but water. I make an easy suggestion ; 
frequently receive Holy Communion, and by so doing receive Christ 
into the house of thy soul. He is a virgin, and the son of a virgin, 
and by His own virgin flesh He will extinguish this fire. This 
assuredly is the most powerful medicine against lust, as Holy 
Scripture teaches, and the holy Fathers testify, and daily expe- 
rience confirms. For this is “ the wheat of the elect, and the 
wine that maketh virgins.” (Zech. ix. 17, where see my com- 
mentary.) 

There are nine correspondences between fever of the body 
and fever of the soul. 1. There is fever when noxious moisture 
and abnormal heat, opposed to the natural heat, affect the heart. 
Thus too there is fever in the soul when man's will is steeped in 
the love of concupiscence, which is contrary to the love of God. 

2. As fever takes away the healthy disposition of the secretions 
of the body, so does the fever of the soul put an end to the due 
regulation of its passions and affections. 

3. As fever is known by a violent pulse, so may the soul's fever 
be discerned by excessive cares and anxieties, as it were pulsating 
in the mind. 

4. Fever excites thirst, which those who are in a fever do not 
quench by drinking, but rather augment, so does the soul's fever 
excite a thirst for riches, honours, and pleasures which is not 
extinguished by the possession of them, but increased. 

5. Fever arises from cold, and ends in burning heat. So does 
the soul's fever often arise from negligence, ease, and torpor. 
Hence is the cupidity of luxury and pride kindled and inflamed. 

6. Fever vitiates the taste, making sweet things and honey itself 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



BODILY AND SPIRITUAL FEVERS. 335 

appear bitter ; so the soul's fever makes divine things — such as 
spiritual reading — appear insipid. 

7. Fever makes a sound, flourishing, and beautiful body appear 
weak, pallid, ugly; so too does the soul's fever make the soul weak, 
unnerved, deformed. 

8. Fever agitates a man, will not suffer him to rest; so does the 
soul's fever make a man unquiet, so that he cannot fix his mind, 
but, ever unstable, he falls into lust after lust. 

9. As one fever is apt to produce another, so does one vice 
beget another and yet another. In short, the heretic labours 
under a pestilential fever; the slothful man under a hectic and 
slow fever; the glutton under a daily, and the inconstant man 
under a tertian fever. 

And he touched her hand , &c. S. Luke adds, He commanded the 
fever . Gr. brerlfiiprt ru> irvpcr<£, t\e. y He rebuked the fever . As 

Euthymius says, with powerful authority He commanded, and as 
it were, threatened the fever. Well says B. Peter Chrysologus 
( Serm . 18), “Ye see how the fever let go its hold of her whom 
Christ held. There stood not infirmity where the Author of 
salvation was present There could be no approach of death 
there where the Lifegiver had entered. He took her by the hand \ it 
is said. What need could there be for touching her, when He 
had the power to command ? Christ took hold of this woman's 
hand, for life, because Adam from a woman's hand had received 
death. He held her hand, that what the hand of presumptuous 
Eve had lost, the hand of her Maker might restore. 

When even was come . . . he healed many that were sick . S. 

Luke says (iv. 40), by imposition of hands. For Christ did not dis- 
dain, with His most pure and Divine hands, to touch those who 
had ulcers, running sores, and leprosies, that He might show the 
power and virtue of His Divine touch, and heal them all. 

Thai it might be fulfilled , &c. These words of Isaiah have a two- 
fold meaning. The first is concerning diseases of the soul, i.e., 
sins and their penalty, which Christ took upon Himself, and 
abolished upon the cross. This was Isaiah's chief meaning, as 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



336 


COVETOUSNESS OF THE SCRIBE. 


appears from what follows, and from the words, He carried. The 
second meaning* concerns diseases of the body, which are at once 
the types and result of diseases of the soul. These too, Matthew 
here says, Christ bore : not by actually becoming diseased Himself, 
but by compassion, and by wholly healing those who were 
diseased. Hence the Syriac translates, He shall sustain our sicknesses. 
Christ bore so many torments, and even the death of the cross, 
that He might do away with all infirmities, and death itself, either 
in this life or at the resurrection — in other words, that He might 
take away sin with all its consequences and penalties. Thus 
therefore Christ carried our sins, thus also our diseases and 
punishments. And thus Christ had the power of healing diseases 
in that He Himself took them upon Himself, by atoning for and 
expiating them upon the cross. Thus S. Chrysostom and Origen 
(See my comment on Is. liii. 4.) 

And a certain scribe came to him , &c. This doctor of the Law 
seeing Jesus preparing to depart, and cross over the lake, and 
being moved by His preaching and miracles, and the concourse of 
applauding people, desired to be associated with Him as a disciple 
with a master. 

And Jesus said unto him , &c. Nests; the Greek has jtaraorop'OTct?, 
t\e., shady coverts made by the boughs and leaves of trees. S. 
Cyprian (lib. I. ad Quirinum , c. 11), and S. Augustine translate 
the word, inns. 

The meaning is — common, worthless, and even noxious animals, 
such as foxes and birds of prey, have places of rest and shelter ; 
but the Son of Man, He who was born of the Virgin, and made 
man, hath nothing of His own, not a cushion, or a bed, or a 
bench on which to rest His head. 

Christ here detects and uncovers the latent ulcer of covetous- 
ness in the Scribe. It is as though He said to him, “Thou 
desirest to follow Me because thou seest Me pleasing to the 
people, because of the healing and benefits which I bestow upon 
them. Hence thou hopest, in following Me, to increase thy pos- 
sessions, and pick up many gifts, as though I made Me and Mine 


Digitized by C.ooQle 



HERESY 07 DES1DERIUS. 


337 


rich by the Gospel. But thou art mistaken, for I, as it were, the 
Master of perfection, am poor and a lover of poverty Myself, and 
such I wish My disciples to be, that being free from the care ot 
things temporal, they may be wholly at leisure for God and 
preaching.” When the Scribe heard this he was silent ; and, 
being disappointed of his hope, withdrew himself from the eyes of 
Christ, as Matthew tacitly intimates. Thus S. Hilary, Theophy- 
lact, Euthymius, and S. Jerome explain. “ Why,” says S. Jerome, 
“do you wish to follow Me for the sake of riches and worldly 
gain, when I have not even one little guest-chamber?” 

Let religious, who unite themselves to God by the profession of 
poverty, imitate this example of Christ, and look for support to 
His Providence. 

This passage also refutes the heresy of those who condemn 
voluntary poverty, which religious profess. 

The originator of this heresy was a certain Lombard, named 
Desiderius* in the time of Pope Alexander IV., and another called 
William of Holy Love, in the same age, who are entirely con- 
futed by SS. Thomas and Bonaventura. By an entirely opposite 
error, other heretics, called Apostolici , have falsely concluded from 
this passage, as S. Augustine testifies (Hares. 40), that this abso- 
lute poverty is necessary for all men for salvation. From the 
same passage the Waldenses, or Poor Men of Lyons, and Wick- 
lifFe, have falsely argued that it is unlawful for bishops and priests 
to possess any property, but that they ought to live only on alms, 
because Christ did so. But Christ did so being perfect, and gave 
it as a counsel, not as a command necessary to salvation. Hence 
this error is denounced by many decrees of Councils. 

From this passage it is also plain that poverty, and its very 
marrow and efficacy, consist in this — that a man should possess 
and affect nothing as though it were his own, but should keep his 
affections free for God alone, to serve Him. And it is not repug- 
nant to this spirit, but conformable to it, to possess in common 
things necessary for life. And so, by a decree of the Council of 
Trent (Sess. 25, c. 3), all religious, except the Franciscans, are 

% 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



338 


THE MEANING OF 


allowed to own even real property in common, that they may not 
be forced to beg, nor be anxious about supplies, nor become 
burdensome to the faithful. For even Christ and the Apostles 
had goods in common, of which Judas was the steward and dis- 
penser, as appears from John xii. 6. 

Son of Man. That is, Man sprung from man, as Christ con- 
stantly calls Himself, in His love of humility, because He who 
was God deigned for our sakes to become incarnate, and be 
made man. 

But of what man is Christ the Son ? First, by man, the heathen 
understood Joseph, whence they contended that he was begotten 
of Joseph, not conceived by the Holy Ghost, as S. Justin testifies 
( Quasi . 66 ad Or/hodoxos). But this is contrary to Scripture 
and the Creeds. 

2. Theophylact says, Christ is the Son of Man, id., of the 
Virgin Mary, His mother; for man is common gender, and 
may be used of a male or a female, like the Greek SvOpanro?. But 
the addition in Greek of the masculine article shows that the 
word is here restricted to signify a male. 

3. And more probably, others say, Son of Man, id., of Abra- 
ham, or David ; for to them it was promised that of their posterity 
the Messiah, or Christ, should be born. 

4. Others, Christ is the Son of Man, i.e., of mm, as of the patri- 
archs and kings, from whom Matthew has deduced his genealogy. 

5. And last, Christ is the Son of Man, i.e., of Adam, because 
He, like all other men, was sprung from Adam. For Adam is 
called absolutely man, because he was the first man, and the 
parent of all other men. Hence Adam, in Hebrew, means man. 
There is a reference to Ezek. ii. 1. Ezekiel, who is a type 
of Christ, is called son of man, in Hebrew, bm-adam, i.e., eon of 
Adam. Whence S. Gregory Nazianzen (de Theolog. Oral. 4) says, 
Christ is called Son of Adam, according to the Hebrew, not to 
show that He had a man for His father, but that through the 
Virgin Mary He derived His generation from Adam. For He 
willed to be born of Adam, that by this means He might repair 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



SON OF MAN. 


339 


the Fall of Adam and his posterity. Hence S. Augustine (lib. 2 
de Cottsms. Evang . c. i) says, “He commendeth unto us how 
mercifully He hath deigned to be of us, and, as it were, com- 
mending* the mystery of His wonderful Incarnation, He often 
sounds this title (Son of Man) in our ears.” 

Son of Man signifies more than man, because man can be 
created by God alone, as Adam was created; but Son of Man 
signifies sprung from Adam, the common parent, that first might 
be set forth the infinite humility of Christ, that He should deign 
to be sprung from a sinful man, and to receive in Himself his 
miseries and his mortality in that earthly body which He assumed. 
For Adam is derived from Adama, the ground \ as homo from humus , 
mor/alis from mors , “death.” (See what I have said on Ezek. ii. i.) 
2. There is shown the wonderful brotherhood and charity of 
Christ to men, whereby He willed to be born in Bethlehem, of 
the same common parent Adam, that He might become the 
Brother of all men, and akin to them in blood, that He might be 
closely grafted into human nature, and united to it, even to the 
whole company of mankind, by human generation and natural 
birth from man, after the manner which I explained on chap. i. 18, 
according to those words of Isaiah, “ Unto us a Son is born, a 
Child is given.” Son oj Man therefore denotes the perfect kind- 
ness, friendship, and condescension of Christ, and the blandish- 
ments of His love, by which He offers Himself to men as the Son 
of Man , as a Child to children, that with' Him, as a most sweet 
Little One, as a most delightsome Brother, they may take delight, 
and have pleasure, according to the words, “ My delight is with 
the sons of men.” (Prov. viii.) Why dost thou fear, O man, to 
draw nigh to Jesus ? Lo I He is the Son of Man, Why tremblest 
thou, O sinner, at the wrath of God ? Come unto Jesus, the Son 
of Man , made a little Child for thee. In the whole world there is 
no Child so sweet — no son so dear. For “the Son of Man came 
to seek and to save that which was lost.” And “ the Son of Matt 
came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give His 
life a ransom for many.” Son of Man , therefore, is the proper 

z 2 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



340 


ANECDOTE OF S. PHILIP. 


name of, or rather the name appropriated to Christ. It is the 
mark of His dignity, and of His love, the wonder of all ages, that 
the Only- Begotten Son of God should, for men, deign to become 
the Son of Man } and to have His converse with men, that He 
might teach them the way of salvation, and redeem them by His 
Cross, and make them happy in heaven. 

Ver. 21 . — And another of Jus disciples , &c. This disciple was not 
one of the twelve Apostles, but some other person who was called 
by Christ to follow Him. We must supply from Luke ix. 59, that 
Christ previously said to this same person, Follow me . He did not 
refuse the call of Christ, but wished, after having discharged his 
debt of filial piety, to be more free to follow Him. So says the 
Gloss . From the answer of this disciple, given by S. Matthew, 
we may understand his questioning and vocation by Christ. 

Lord. Reverently and obediently he speaks to Christ as desiring 
to do Him service ; whereas the Scribe, with somewhat too much 
freedom, addressed Christ as Teacher (magister). The one was 
deservedly left, the other chosen. How much of evil was there 
in the Scribe ? how much of good was there in this man? says S. 
Augustine. (Serm. 9 de Verb. Domini.) 

Suffer me first , &c. Theophylact, and after him Franc. Lucas, 
think that his father was still living, and that he said in effect — 
“ Suffer me to remain with my father, who is now an old man, 
that I may support him until he die. Then, having done what 
filial duty requires, I will follow Thee." Thus he asked for a long 
furlough from the spiritual warfare. 

S. Chrysostom and others expound more plainly and accurately 
that his father was already dead, and that Christ most opportunely 
and benignantly called him. As though he said, " Thy father is 
now deceased, Follow Me. I will be to thee a better Father. He 
had need of thy good offices, but thou hast need of Mine. He 
was the author of thy carnal life ; I will give thee spiritual and 
eternal life." 

Clement of Alexandria, ( Slromat . lib. 2) thinks that Philip, who 
was afterwards an Apostle, was the man to whom Christ said, 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


WHO ARE THE DEAD* 


341 


Suffer the dead to lury their dead . But the objection to this is that 
Philip had been already called by Christ, and was following Him, 
as is plain from John i. 43. Unless you assume that Philip had 
been a follower of Christ before this, but, having heard that his 
father had departed this life, asked Christ's permission to bury 
him, but did not obtain it. This would explain why he is here 
called a disciple by S. Matthew. And another of his disciples. 
And this seems very probable, especially as Clement relates the 
matter as certain. 

But Jesus saith, &c . A second time Jesus calls him. Twice He 
saith, Follow Me, namely before his excusing himself, and after- 
wards because He effectually willed him to be His disciple. He 
puts aside the impediment which he alleged, and forbids him to 
return to bury his father. But He assigns most convincing 
reasons for His refusal. He says, Suffer the dead to bury their dead. 
Observe, Christ does not intend to condemn the burial of the dead, 
which is a work of mercy praised in the Book of Tobit. But He 
wished to teach that when God calls He must immediately be 
obeyed. For God knows our hindrances, and when He calls us 
in them He wishes us to break them off, and He in effect promises 
us His grace and help to enable us to do so. Wherefore He lays 
it down that following the call of God is to be preferred even to 
the burial of our parents. That is, divine are to be preferred to 
human duties, religion to nature, God to man. Christ here plays 
upon the word dead. For first the dead signifies those who are 
spiritually dead, as unbelievers and those who are destitute of the 
grace of God. Thus SS. Chrysostom, Jerome, and Augustine. 
Afterwards by dead He means those who are corporeally dead. 
For as a body separated from the soul is dead, so a soul separated 
from God is dead. As the soul is the life of the body so is God 
the life of the soul, says S. Augustine. Let the dead, such as the 
Jews who reject belief in Me ; let those who are steeped in sin and 
worldliness, bury their own dead , i.e., those who are figuratively 
dead like themselves, or those of their own relations who are 
naturally dead, and, it may be, spiritually dead likewise. But as 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



342 


PREACHING THE GOSPEL. 


for thee, I would have thee follow Me, who am the true Life, and 
live with Me here through My perfect grace, and in the world to 
come in perfect glory, and preach this Gospel to others, as Luke 
adds. 

Hear S. Ambrose: “He is not allowed to go and bury his 
father, that thou mayest understand that human things must give 
way to Divine things/' 

Tropologically . Christ signifies that they are dead, and busy 
themselves with dead things, who give up their nlinds to the wills 
and legacies of parents or relations. But to this His disciple 
lie says, Thy destiny is to live for God, and as thou hast begun 
to be alive unto Him by grace, go on thus to live unto Him, and 
serve Him, the living God. And so leave to the dead and dying 
the things which are dead and about to die. Thus S. Jerome : 
“ If the dead bury the dead, we ought to care not for the things 
which are dead, but for those which are alive, lest whilst we are 
anxious about the dead we too should be called dead." 

And S. Chrysostom says, “If it was forbidden to be absent 
from spiritual things, for the brief space of time needed for burying 
parents, weigh well the punishment of which they shall be counted 
worthy who are always absent from those things which are worthy 
of Christ, because they prefer the worthless and abject affairs of 
worldly business to things which are indeed necessary, and that 
even when none compels. 

Luke adds (ix. 66 ), But go thou and preach the kingdom of God, 
namely, the way by which men may arrive at the kingdom of 
heaven — that is to say, by faith, and a life conformed to the Gospel 
which Christ has made known. As S. Augustine says (< de Verb . 
Domini, Serm. 7), “When the Lord is preparing men for the 
Gospel, He will not receive any such excuses as have to do with 
fleshly and temporal affairs." For, as S. Chrysostom says again, 
“ It is far better to preach the kingdom of God, and rescue others 
from death, than to bury one who is dead and can be of no use, 
especially when there are other persons to discharge the office." 
And S. Gregory speaks to the same purpose (lib. 19, Moral . c. 14) 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



TEMPEST ON THE LAKE. 


343 


“Sometimes in our actions lesser good deeds are to be set aside, in 
favour of other things of greater usefulness. For who is ignorant 
that it is indeed a good work to bury the dead, but that it is better 
to preach the Gospel ? ” 

And when he had gone up into a ship , &c. The Vulgate has 
navicula , “a little ship,” because they were small boats, which 
were used for crossing the lake, and for fishing. S. Mark adds 
(iv. 36), they received him as he was , t\e., as he was teaching the 
multitudes who were standing upon the shore. 

And, behold \ there was a great tempest in the sea. S. Luke adds, the 
waves were filling the ship , and they were in jeopardy . Bede and 
Strabus and the Gloss are of opinion that in this storm Christ's 
ship alone was tossed, but not the other little ships which accom- 
panied them, that Christ might show thereby that He was the 
Author of the storm arising, as well as of its being made to cease. 
But it is more correct to suppose that the other \ boats were also 
storm-tossed, for these boats were near, yea, close to Christ's 
ship, that there might be shown the greater fury of the tempest, 
and the greater power of Christ in calming it. Moreover, God 
permitted this storm to arise from natural causes, such as vapours, 
and winds concurring with them, so that Christ raised and sent 
this storm. 

He did this — 1. That He might declare His power, and show 
that He is Lord of the sea as well as the land, says Origen. 
{Horn. 6 in Diver.) Hence the angel who appeared to S. John 
set his right foot upon the sea, as though commanding it. 
(Rev. x. 2.) For this angel represented Christ, as Bede, Richard 
of S. Victor, and others say. 

2. That He might exercise His disciples in bearing, as well 
the persecutions of men as the storms and tempests of wind and 
rain which they must often experience in going about the world 
to evangelize it. So Theophylact Whence also S. Chrysostom 
gives this reason, “ that He might exercise the athletes of the 
world in temptations and terrors.” 

3. That His disciples, and the other passengers in the ship 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


344 


HOW SAILORS PREPAR1 


might, through the miracle ot the quelled tempest, believe in 
Him that He was very and omnipotent God. 

Topologically^ this tempest in the sea, says S. Chrysostom, was 
a type of the future trials of the Church. For the ship in the 
waves represents the Church and the soul in temptations, by 
which they are quickened and profited. For a life without trial 
is like a dead sea, as Seneca says ( Epist . 67). And thus a man 
who is without temptation is like one who is in a swoon, or dead. 
Temptation rouses him up to exert his faculties, that he may 
vanquish it. 

Again, as a tempest drives ships before it, that they may the 
more speedily arrive at their wished-for haven, so does tempta- 
tion stimulate a man to greater zeal for virtue, whereby he may 
be borne on towards heaven. As Chrysologus says (&r. 20), “It 
is not serene weather which proves the skill of the pilot, it is 
tempestuous weather which does that. Any sort of a sailor can 
manage a ship in a gentle breeze, but for the confusion of a 
tempest the skill of the best captain is needed." 

The tempest therefore of the waves and winds is the temptation 
of pride, gluttony, lust, envy, and so on. 

Let him then who is beaten by temptation do as sailors do in a 
storm. First they furl their sails, that the fury of the wind may 
not have so much power over the ship to hurry it to destruction. 
Thus let him who is tempted furl the sails of his pleasures, and 
give himself up to fasting and penance. 

2. Sailors make for the open sea, that their ship may not strike 
against rocks. So let him who is tempted flee from the world and 
worldly things, and let him betake himself to God as a haven of 
refuge ; and let him say with the Psalmist, “ My soul refused 
comfort : I thought upon God and was refreshed." (Ps. lxxvii.) 

3. Sailors cast fittings and merchandise into the sea, that they 
may lighten the ship ; so let the tempted unburden themselves by 
means of contrition and confession of the heavy weight of their 
sins, and lighten their minds. Hence doctors teach that they who 
are about to go on a voyage, especially a long and perilous one, 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



FOR A STORM. 


345 


ought to go to confession, that they may place themselves in a 
state of grace, as persons drawing nigh to the article of death, 
not once only, but in a manifold manner. 

Lastly, a good captain, maintaining his courage, and having 
presence of mind, tries every way of escaping from the peril of 
the storm. Let the mind of him who is tempted do the same. A 
master of a ship, says S. Cyprian ( Tract . de Mortal .) is proved by 
a storm, as a soldier is by a battle. 

But he was asleep . This was voluntary, but at the same time 
natural sleep. I. That the winds and storm might increase, so 
that Christ's power and authority might be the more manifested 
by His quelling them. 

2. “There is set forth," says S. Ambrose, “the security of His 
power, that whilst all others were afraid He abode in calm 
serenity, so that when we are in any similar tribulation we might 
flee unto Him, and fix our hopes firmly upon Him, according to 
the saying in Proverbs xxviii. I : “ The righteous is bold as a lion." 

Moreover the pillow upon which, as S. Mark relates, Christ 
rested is mystically, I. A good conscience. 2. Resignation to 
the will of God. 3. Confidence in God's power and provi- 
dence. For on this a believer rests, and as it were sleeps, in all 
adversities. 

Origen ( Horn . 6 in Diversts ) says, Christ slept as to His body, 
but was awake as to His Deity. The sleep of Jonah when the 
rest who were in the ship were in peril was a type of this. See 
what I have there said. Moreover what kind of sleep this of 
Christ's was, and wherein it differed from ours, see in Toletus, 
Annotate 43, in 8. cap. Luc. 

Tropologically , says the Gloss, Christ sleeps when we are negli- 
gent : but when faith revives He commands the winds and the 
waves. 

And he said unto them , Why are ye fearful , &c. He said this before 
He had stilled the tempest, according to S. Matthew's order in 
this place, though S. Mark and S. Luke mention it afterwards. 
It was fitting that the extreme terror of the disciples should be 


Digitized by CjOOQle 


MEANING OF FAITH. 


34b 

calmed before the raging of the sea, and that their waning faith 
should be strengthened that it might be rewarded by the cessation 
of the storm. So Jansen and others. 

Of little faith . For ye do not seem perfectly to believe that I 
am God ; and ye do not trust to My providential care^ nor believe 
that whilst I am asleep I know of your peril, and will deliver you 
from it. So S. Chrysostom. 

1. Faith here may be taken in the strict use of the word. Or, 
2. for confidence, which is produced and sharpened by faith. On 
the other hand, little faith is the cause of little confidence. S. Luke 
gives the striking question of our Lord to them, Where is your 
faith ? Hear S. Bernard : “ Though the world rages, though the 
enemy roars, though the flesh itself lusts against the spirit, yet will 
[ put my trust in Thee.” 

Then he arose . For rebuked , the Greek has hrcrtfirjcre which 

corresponds to the Hebrew njtt gaar. He chided, as the Arabic 
translates, as a master does his servant. Whence S. Mark says, 
according to the literal translation of the Greek, He threatened the 
wind , and said unto the sea , Be silent ', be muzzled . 

By these expressions is denoted the great violence by which the 
sea was tossed with the winds, such as no human power but only 
Divine, could make to cease. Here, therefore, Christ shows that 
He was God, since He, as their Master, commanded the winds and 
the sea. 

Tropologically . Christ thought of, and invoked in the mind, 
commands the persecutions of the Church, and the temptations of 
the soul, as S. Augustine teaches: “Hast thou heard reviling? 
It is the wind. Art thou angry ? It is the waves. For when the 
wind blows, the waves arisen the ship is in peril, thy heart is in 
danger, for thy heart is tossed by waves. When thou hearest 
reproach, thou desirest to vindicate thyself. Lo, thou art avenged, 
and yielding to another’s evil, thou hast shipwrecked thyself. And 
why is this ? It is because Christ is asleep within thee. Thou 
hast forgotten Christ. Awake Him therefore ; call Him to 
remembrance. Let Christ keep vigil within thee. And think thou 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



THE YARD-ARM OF THE CROSS. 


347 


upon Him. Why shouldst thou wish to be avenged ? He hath 
cut thee off from vengeance by His cry upon the Cross, ‘Father, 
forgive them, for they know not what they do/ " And after some 
other remarks, S. Austin proceeds : “ I will refrain from anger, 
and will return to the quiet of my heart. Christ commanded the 
sea, and there was a calm. What I have said with reference to 
anger, you may apply to all your other temptations. Temptation 
arises, it is the wind. Thou art troubled, it is the waves. Awake 
Christ and let Him speak with thee/' 

Allegorically , Bede says: “The ship with its yard-arm is the 
tree of the Cross, by the help of which we who were sunk in the 
waves of the sea, proceed as Christ's disciples to the privileges ot 
the eternal country. For Christ says, ‘ If any man will come after 
Me, let him take up the Cross and follow Me/ 99 

Anagogicallyf Christ slept in the time of His Passion. The 
tempest arose which was stirred up by the blasts of the devil. The 
disciples awake the Lord, whose death they had witnessed, by 
desiring His Resurrection. He rises with a speedy Resurrection. 
He rebukes the wind — that is, the pride of the devil. He calms 
the tempest — that is, the insulting madness of the Jews. He chides 
His disciples, for He upbraided them for their incredulity after 
His Resurrection/' 

And there was a great calm , for as S. Jerome says, “ All creatures 
feel their Creator; and things which are senseless to us are 
sensible to Him." Or, as Origeri says, “It became Him who was 
so great to do great things." 

And the men marvelled , saying , &c. These men were not the 
disciples, but the sailors and others who were in the ship of Jesus, 
and in the other ships which accompanied it. For, as Origen says, 
“ The disciples are never named but with the mark of distinction, 
Apostles , or Disciples ." 

What manner of man . The Greek is irorairos, which is not simply 
a particle of interrogation, but is uttered with an emphasis of 
wonder and admiration. “ Who is this ? He does not seem to be 
like other men, but a Being of a different race." 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


34 » 


TORMENT OF THE DEVILS, 


And when he was come to /he other side , &c. This miracle of healing 
the demoniac is given with greater fulness by S. Luke. The 
commentary, therefore, upon it will be given in S. Luke yiii. 
27—40. 

Hast thou come hither to torment us before the time ? From these 
words some have thought that the devils have not yet received the 
extreme punishment of their offences, and that they will not be 
condemned to be tormented in hell before the Day of Judgment. 
S. Hilary has been thought to be of this opinion, by saying ( Can. 
8), “ It cried out, why should He grudge them their position ? (in 
the demoniac) why should He attack them before the time of 
judgment ?” The same opinion is by some ascribed to S. Irenaeus, 
Justin, Lactantius, Eusebius, Nicephorus; but I have found nothing 
of the kind in their writings. And the words of S. Hilary do not 
bear that meaning, but only say what S. Matthew relates. 

For it is certain from Scripture and the Fathers that the 
devils, from the beginning of the world were condemned as soon 
as they sinned, and were tormented in the fire of hell. For by 
that fire they are tormented, even when they are away from it, 
having gone forth from hell, and taken up their abode in the air. 
This is brought about by the omnipotence of God. The fire of 
hell is a supernatural instrument of the omnipotent God, hence by 
the will of God, it can operate in the most distant places. 

When therefore they said to Christ, Art thou come , Ac., they did 
not speak of the ancient, perpetual, irrevocable torment of hell fire, 
but they deprecated any new torment being inflicted upon them by 
Christ. This new torment was their expulsion from the bodies of 
those whom they were in the habit of possessing, as S. Chryso 
atom says, and their banishment to the prison-house of hell. 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


CHAPTER IX. 


9 Christ curing one sick of the palsy, 9 calleth Matthew from the receipt of 
custom, 10 eateth with publicans and sinners , 14 defendeth his disciples for not 
fasting ; 20 cureth the bloody issue \ 23 raiseth from death faints* daughter , 
27 giveth sight to two blind men, 32 healeth a dumb man possessed of a devil, 
36 and hath compassion of the multitude. 

A ND he entered into a ship, and passed over, and came into his own city. 

2 And, behold, they brought to him a man sick of the palsy, lying on a 
bed ; and Jesus seeing their faith said unto the sick of the palsy ; Son, be of good 
cheer ; thy sins be forgiven thee. 

3 And, behold, certain of the scribes said within themselves, This man bias* 
phemeth. 

4 And Jesus knowing their thoughts said. Wherefore think ye evil in your hearts ? 
5 For whether is easier, to say, Thy sins be forgiven thee ; or to say, Arise, 
and walk ? 

6 But that ye may know that the Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins, 
(then saith he to the sick of the palsy,) Arise, take up thy bed, and gounto thine house. 
And he arose, and departed to his house. 

8 But when the multitudes saw it, they marvelled, a id glorified God, which 
had given such power unto men. 

9 And as Jesus passed forth from thence, he saw a man, named Matthew, 
sitting at the receipt of custom : and he saith unto him, Follow me. And he 
arose, and followed him. 

10 And it came to pass, as Jesus sat at meat in the house, behold, many 
publicans and sinners came and sat down with him and his disciples. 

11 And when the Pharisees saw it, they said unto his disciples, Why eateth 
your Master with publicans and sinners? 

12 But when Jesus heard that , he said unto them, They that be whole need 
not a physici in, but they that are sick. 

13 But go ye and learn what that meaneth, I will have mercy, and not 
sacrifice: for I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. 

14 Then came to him the disciples of John, saying, Why do we and the Phi* 
risees fast oft, but thy disciples fast not l 


Digitized by LjOOQle 


350 


15 And Jesus said unto them, Can the children of the bridecbamber mourn, 
as long as the bridegroom is with them ? but the days will come, when the 
bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast 

16 No man putteth a piece of new cloth unto an old garment ; for that 
which is put in to fill it up taketh from the garment, and the rent is made worse. 

17 Neither do men put new wine into old bottles ; else the bottles break , 
and the wine runneth out, and the bottles perish : but they put new wine into 
new bottles, and both are preserved. 

18 While he spake these things unto them, behold, there came a certain ruler 
and worshipped him, saying, My daughter is even now dead : but come and lay 
thy hand upon her, and she shall live. 

19 And Jesus arose and followed him, and so did his disciples. 

20 And, behold, a woman, which was diseased with an issue of blood twelve 
years, came behind him, and touched the hem of his garment : 

21 For she said within herself If I may but touch his garment, I shall be whole. 

22 And Jesus turned him about, and when he saw her, he said. Daughter, be 
of good comfort ; thy faith hath made thee whole. And the woman was made 
whole from that hour. 

23 And when Jesus came into the ruler’s house, and saw the minstrels and 
the people making a noise, 

24 He said unto them, Give place ; for the maid is not dead, but sleepeth. And 
they laughed him to scorn. 

25 But when the people were put forth, he went in, and took her by the hand, 
and the maid arose. 

26 And the fame hereof went abroad into all that land. 

27 And when Jesus departed thence, two blind men followed him, crying, and 
saying, Thou son of David, have mercy on us. 

28 And when he was come into the house, the blind men came to him : and 
Tesus saith unto them, Believe ye that I am able to do this ? They said unto 
him, Yea, Lord.' 

29 Then touched he their eyes, saying, According to your faith be it unto you. 

30 And their eyes were opened: and Jesus straiily charged them, saying, See 
that know man know & 

31 But they, when they were departed, spread abroad his fame in all that 
country. 

32 As they went out, behold, they brought to him a dumb man, possessed 
with a devil. 

33 And when the devil was cast out, the dumb spake : and the multitudes 
marvelled, saying, it was never so seen in Israel. 

34 But the Pharisees said, He casteth out devils through the prince of the devils. 

35 And Jesus went about all the cities and villages, teaching in their syna- 
gogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every sickness and 
every disease among the people. 

36 But when he saw the multitudes, he was moved with compassion on them, 
because they fainted, and were scattered abroad, as sheep having no shepherd. 

37 Then saith he unto his disciples. The harvest truly is plenteous, but the 
lalxrarers are few : 

38 Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he will send forth labourers 
Into his harvest. 


Digitized by ^ooQle 


OPENING THE ROOF. 


35 1 


Passed aver: that is, sailed across the sea of Galilee, to its 
western side. And came inio his awn city . Sedulius thinks Beth- 
lehem is meant, because he was born there. S. Jerome, with more 
probability, understands Nazareth, where He was brought up. 
The best opinion is that ot S. Chrysostom, Theophylact, Maldo- 
natus, and many others, who say, Capernaum is to be understood, 
in which Christ often dwelt. And (chap. iv. 13) S. Matthew says 
that, leaving Nazareth, Christ dwelt there. And S. Mark teaches 
that the healing of the paralytic, which is now to be related, look 
place at Capernaum. (Mark ii. 3.) As Christ ennobled Bethlehem 
by His birth, Nazareth by his education, Egypt by His flight, 
Jerusalem by His Passion, so he adorned Capernaum, by His 
dwelling, preaching, and working miracles there. 

And, behold ’ they brought to him , &c. S. Mark says, the paralytic 
man was carried by four bearers. Learn from this to care not 
only for thine own salvation, but for that of thy neighbours, and that 
earnestly, as well because charity demands it, as because God 
often chastises the good as well as the bad, because the good 
neglect to chastise and amend the faults of the bad. 

And seeing their faith , &c. The faith of those who brought the 
paralytic to Christ. For when they were not able to bring him 
into the house to Christ, they carried him up upon the roof. The 
roofs of the houses in Palestine are not steep, as they are in 
Germany, but flat, more so than they are in Italy. They uncovered 
the roof ; that is, they broke through it, by taking away the tiles. 
S. Mark says, they laid bare the roof: and thus they let down the 
sick man by means of ropes before Christ. All these things 
showed their great faith and devotion to Christ 

Their refers to those who brought him, say SS. Ambrose and 
Jerome. S. Chrysostom adds, that the faith of the paralytic himself is 
included, for through this faith he wished himself to be carried, and 
let down through the roof before Christ. Neither would he have 
heard the words, “Thy sins are forgiven thee,” unless he had had 
faith. Moreover this faith was the faith of miracles. Learn 
from him that the measure of prayer is faith and hope. For what 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


352 


REWARD OF FAITH 


thou hopest from Christ that shalt thou obtain of Him. For the 
more thou enlargest the lap of thy soul by hope, the more capa- 
cious thou makest it, and the more worthy that God should fill it, 
according to these words in the Psalm, “ Open thy mouth wide, 
and I will fill it.” And, " I opened my mouth and drew in my 
breath.” (Ps. cxix. 13 1.) 

Wherefore Christ said to this man, Son, be of good cheer \ u Trust 
that thou shalt be by Me miraculously healed, first in thy soul 
from sin, then in thy body from palsy. For because of sin, God 
has afflicted thee with this disease. Observe, this paralytic already 
had faith and hope in Christ as I have just shown, but Christ bids 
him confirm and increase his faith. Moreover, by these outward 
words, Be of good cheer, but more by the inward afflatus of His 
grace, Christ stirred up the paralytic to an act of great faith, hope, 
and sorrow for the sins which he had committed, and firm deter- 
mination to enter upon a new and holy life, and love God above 
all things, that by this means he might be in a fit state to receive 
remission of his sins. For such are the dispositions which Scrip- 
ture in other places requires. Christ, however, here and elsewhere, 
names and requires faith alone, and attributes salvation, more 
especially of the body, to faith, because faith is the prime origin 
and root of hope, fear, sorrow, and love of God. And faith in 
Christ was the thing, at that time, to be especially insisted on. 

The heretics, therefore, can find nothing in this passageto prove 
that faith only properly justifies; especially since what is here 
treated of is miraculous faith, which they themselves distinguish 
from justifying faith. I may add that Christ here speaks of the 
faith of the bearers as much, or more than he does of the faith of 
the paralytic, and their faith could not justify the sick man. 

Son. For he truly is a son of God, whose sins are forgiven, 
says Haymo. Observe here the kindness of Christ, addressing 
the sick man with these most sweet words. Hence S. Jerome 
exclaims, “O wondrous humility: He calls this despised and 
feeble one, all the joints of whose limbs were loosed, Son, a man 
whom the priests would not deign to touch.” 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



PROVISION OF THE CANON LAW. 353 

Thy sins are forgiven thee : Gr. (tycwvTcu, have been forgiven. This 
is a Hebraism for are forgiven. 

S. Chrysostom observes that Christ first forgave the paralytic 
his sins, and then healed him, that from the calumnious remarks of 
the Pharisees, which he foresaw would follow upon what he had 
said and done, He might take occasion to prove His Divinity. 
This He did by a triple miracle, as an irrefragable proof, first by 
declaring openly their secret thoughts and murmurs against Him, 
secondly by healing the paralytic, thirdly by performing the 
miracle with this end in view, that, by it, He might demonstrate 
He had the power of forgiving sins. 

Taken, however, literally, the more patent reason was, that He 
might show that palsies, and other diseases often arise, not so 
much from natural causes, as from sin. For He forgives the sins 
first, and then He heals the paralytic ; showing that when the 
cause was taken away, the effect followed. 

This is why it is ordered by the canon law that physicians 
should seek the health of a sick man's soul before that of his 
body. (See chap. Cum infirm . de pceniten. et remiss.) This rule is 
strictly observed at Rome, where physicians after the third day of 
illness, especially when there is peril of death, may not go near a 
sick person, except he forthwith cleanse his soul from sin by 
sacramental confession. For, as S. Basil says {Reg. 55), “Often- 
times are diseases the scourges of sins, which are sent for no other 
purpose than that we should amend our lives." 

Again, expositors collect from this passage that those who were 
corporeally healed by Christ were usually spiritually healed also 
by Him, and justified, as was the case with the paralytic. And 
this is consonant with Christ's liberality, that He should not be- 
stow a half-healing, but whole and perfect salvation. For the 
works of God are perfect. And we must remember that Christ 
came into the world chiefly to bestow spiritual health. This is 
what he says of another paralytic, “ I have made a whole man 
sound upon the sabbath." (John vii. 23, Vulg.) 

Andy behold \ certain a f the scribes , &c. Within themselves. Syr., in 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


354 


proof of Christ's divinity. 


their soul; because He takes away God's special prerogative of 
pardoning sin, and claims it for Himself, which would be a grave 
dishonour done to God, and therefore blasphemy. Thus they 
thought, supposing Christ was not God, but a mere man. This 
was their perpetual and obstinate error, which led them perpetually 
to persecute Him, even unto the death of the Cross. Wherefore 
S. Mark adds, that they said, “ Who can forgive sins but God 
alone ? " For sin is an offence against God, a violation of the 
Divine Majesty, so that no one can pardon it, except God 
Himself. 

And Jesus burning their thoughts , &c. S. Mark adds that Jesus 
knew in His Spirit. This was not because another revealed to 
Him the thoughts and blasphemies of the Scribes, as the prophets 
knew such things, but by Himself and His own Spirit, pervading 
and penetrating all things. From this the Fathers rightly prove 
the Divinity of Christ against the Arians. For He searches the 
hearts, a thing which God alone can do. Thus S. Jerome, who 
adds, “ Even when keeping silence, He speaks. As though He 
said, ‘ By the same power and majesty by which I behold your 
thoughts, I am able also to forgive men their sins .' 99 So too 
S. Chrysostom and others. Whence Chrysologus says, “ Receive 
the tokens of Christ's Divinity : behold Him come to the secret 
hiding-places of thy thoughts." 

You may say, the Scribes might have raised the following 
objection : — “ Thou, O Jesus, indeed knowest and revealest our 
secret thoughts, but not by Thine own Spirit, for that Thou in no 
way makest plain to us, but by the Spirit of God. Therefore 
Thou art a prophet, and not God, that thou shouldst remit sins." 
I reply, if the Scribes acknowledged Jesus to be a prophet, then 
surely they ought to have believed that He was speaking the 
truth when He said that He had, of Himself, power to forgive 
sins, and therefore that He was God. Again, in the Old Testa- 
ment, the power of remitting sins was given to none of the 
prophets, but it was promised to Messiah alone by the prophets. 
Therefore they ought to have acknowledged that Jesus was the 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


FORGIVENESS GOD’S GREATEST ACT. 


355 


Messiah, and consequently God, as is plain from many passages 
of Scripture. 

Lastly, Christ by His command alone, and proper authority, 
both healed the paralytic, and forgave him his sins, and so in this, 
as in all His other miracles, He had this end in view, that He 
might convince them He was the Messiah — that is, the Son of 
God, who had come in the flesh, the Saviour of the world, the 
Redeemer of sinners, who had been foretold by Moses and the 
prophets. 

Whether is easier , &c. You may ask, whether ot these two is 
absolutely the more difficult ? I answer — 

1. It is, per se , more difficult to forgive sins than to heal a 
paralytic person, yea, than to create heaven and earth. And 
there is d priori reason for this: first, because sin, as an enemy of 
God, is far further away from God than a paralytic, yea, than any 
created thing, forasmuch as these are in themselves good : yea, 
further than nothingness, out of which all things were made, 
itself, for nothingness is only negatively and privatively opposed 
to entity and God ; but sin is diametrically opposed and re- 
pugnant to God. For there are no contraries which are so 
mutually opposed as supreme goodness and supreme badness — 
that is to say, God and sin. 

2. Because remission of sins is something of a higher order 
than the natural order. It has to do with the supernatural order 
of grace. Grace is the highest communion with the Divine 
Nature: for by grace “we are made partakers of the divine 
nature/' as S. Peter says (2 Pet. i. 4). 

I observe, however, secondly: on the contrary, Christ here 
seems to speak of remission of sins as being easier than the healing 
of the paralytic. This was so, because the latter was more diffi- 
cult in respect of the Jews ; and it was a more perilous thing 
besides. For he who saith, I forgive thee thy sins, cannot be 
convicted of falsehood, whether he remits them or not. For 
neither sin, nor its remission, are things that can be seen. But he 
who saith to a paralytic, Arise and walk, exposes both himself 

2 a 2 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


THE POWER OF CHRIST. 


SS6 

and his good name to great peril, if the sick man does not arise. 
Such a one will be convicted by all of imposture and falsehood. 
Just as we are accustomed to say, It is easier to write a history of 
Tartary than a history of Italy : because here a man might be 
convicted of falsehood by multitudes ; but there by no one. 

Lastly, the healing of paralysis is a physical operation, and, 
physically speaking, more difficult than the remission of sins* 
which is, perse, a moral act, of like nature with sin itself. 

Jansen adds, With respect to God, both are equally easy and 
divine, for both are miraculous, and both require exercise of 
omnipotent power. 

Moreover, although of itself the healing of the paralytic was a 
ess work than the remission of sins, yet Christ conclusively 
proves by it that He had the power of forgiving sins. 

Ver. 6. — But that ye may know , &c. Observe the expression. 
Son of Man, for Christ forgave sins, not only as He was God, but 
in that He was man, authoritatively and meritoriously. Because 
His Humanity was hypostatically united to His Divinity, and sub- 
sisted in the Divine Person of the Son of God, therefore He was 
able to make full satisfaction for the sins of the whole world. 

Wherefore this primary power and authority of forgiving sins 
was given unto Him, next unto God, which power He is able to 
grant unto others likewise, such as priests, who are instituted by 
Him, as His ministers, that they too should forgive sins. Whence 
S. Thomas says (3 part . quasi. 63, art . 3), “The power of the 
excellence of Christ standeth in four things. 1. Because His 
merit, and the virtue of His Passion, operate in the sacraments. 
2. Because by His Name the sacraments are sanctified. 3. Be- 
cause He Himself, who gives virtue to the sacraments, had power 
to institute them. 4. Because the effect of the sacraments — in 
other words, the remission of sins, and grace — Christ is able to 
confer without the sacraments. This power is peculiar to Christ 
alone, qud man ; and therefore it has been communicated neither 
to priest nor pontiff, nor to S. Peter.” 

Rise, take up thy bed, &c. Rise • be sound and healed of thy 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



S. SIMON STVLITES. 


357 


palsy ; and to show to the Scribes and all the people that thou 
art healed, take up thy bed, that now thou mayest bear that which 
has lately borne thee, as Sedulius says in this place, “ He him- 
self, with grateful thanks, repaid his hire.” Instead of bed 
(ledum), Mark has grabaium . Grabatus , says Sipontius, is a 
narrow sort of couch on which we recline at noon, as if from 
carabatus , something on which we lay our head, from k apa, the 
head , and, fiarov, passing . Whence the line of Martial — . 

“Went the three-legged grabatus, went the three-legged table.” 

And he arose , &c. He arose at once, for what Christ said was 
straightway done. And the man walked off with the bed upon 
his shoulders. 

S. Simon Stylites followed the example of this miracle of Christ, 
as may be seen in his Life, taken by Surius out of Theodoret. 
“A certain Saracen prince brought to him a paralytic domestic, 
and asked him to heal him. The holy man commanded him to be 
brought into the midst, and bade him abjure the impiety of his 
ancestors. After the man had done this, he asked him if he 
believed in the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. He replied 
that he did believe. ‘ If thou believest,* said he, 4 rise up/ As 
soon as he had arisen, he bade him take up and carry the before- 
named prince, who was an excessively fat man, upon his shoulders, 
as far as his tent. And he immediately raised him up, and carried 
him whither he was bidden. All the spectators were amazed at 
this miracle, and glorified God.” In a similar manner, S. Bernard, 
at the request of the King of France, healed a man sick of the 
• palsy, with the sign of the Cross, and bade him take up his bed. 

TropologicaUy ; by the sick man’s taking up, and carrying his 
bed is meant, that by the just judgment of God it cometh to pass 
that the sinner who aforetime willingly consented to temptation, 
after he has repented, feels temptation against his will. For re- 
pentance truly takes away sin, but not sinful habits and depraved 
inclinations, which the sinner of his own will contracted and put 
on. Thus S. Mary of Egypt, after her conversion, felt for seven- 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


358 


TROPOLOGICALLY. 


teen years the sharp goads of lust, because for so many years 
she had shamefully lived in lust 

But when the multitudes saw it they marvelled \ Ac. Instead of 
marvelled \ the Latin Vulgate has, they feared. S Mark adds, that 
the multitude said, We never saw it after this fashion. S. Luke, We 
have seen strange things to-day . For this man's whole body was 
paralyzed. S. Mark says that, he was borne of four , which shows 
that the palsy had affected every limb. He was a different para- 
lytic from the one of whom S. John makes mention (v. 2), who 
was healed in the Sheep-market at Jerusalem. That man had no 
one carrying him : neither did he believe, as this one did, to whom 
it was said, Son, be of good cheer . 

Tropologically ; paralysis is any disease of the soul whatsoever, 
but especially of fleshly lust, and the carelessness and indifference 
to spiritual things which it generates. For it so entirely pros- 
trates the soul, that it is without power to lift itself up to virtue, to 
heaven, to God. Wherefore the man that labours under this 
disease must be carried by bearers, that is, by pastors, preachers, 
confessors, up upon the housetop, that is, to the desire of salvation 
and heavenly things ; and then must be let down through the roof 
to the feet of Christ ; and they must ask of Him by earnest 
prayer to heal him by His grace, and restore to him the power of 
motion, and the sense of spiritual things. Then when he is healed, 
let him give thanks to Christ his Saviour, and let him not be sloth- 
ful, but let him go away to the house of his mind and conscience, 
and sweep it clean of vices, and adorn it with all virtuous actions. 
Thus ought the soul to trust in the Lord, because He alone is able 
to supply all her wants. She ought to arise from the sleep of sin, 
and the bed of depraved habits, by calling to mind into what a 
state she has fallen, which she doth by confession ; for as he who 
arises, so also does he who confesses, come forth : she ought to 
take up her bed, which pertains to satisfaction, for when that is 
enjoined in confession, it is a sort of burden to be borne, for the 
flesh which, as a bed, gave pleasure, and as it were carried the 
dead soul, ought, after remission and satisfaction, to be a burden 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



CALL OF MATTHEW. 


359 


to a man, as it was to him who cried out, “ O wretched man that 
I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death ?" So 
Salermon, Jansen, Toletus, and others, expound this passage. 

AnagogicaUy , understand it of the celestial glory, concerning 
which the Psalmist speaks, “ I was glad when they said unto me, We 
will go into the house of the Lord/' (Ps. cxxii. i.) For, in the 
resurrection, the Lord win say, “ Arise, that is, from death ; and 
take up thy bed, that is, resume thy body, endowed with glorious 
gifts; and go into thine house, that is, into the eternal and 
heavenly mansion." 

And as Jesus passed forth from thence , Ac. Custom , in Greek, rcAos, 
means revenue ; from which telonium, the word here used by 
S. Matthew, means the house, or place where the sailors and 
merchants paid the tribute and customs' dues upon their ships 
and merchandise. Here sat the publicans, who were the farmers 
and collectors of these dues. Hence the Persian version, instead 
of telonium has, in the house of payment; the Ethiopic has, in the forum , 
or market-place . Matthew was one of these publicans ; whence it 
is probable that his house was at Capernaum, by the shore of the 
Sea of Galilee, at a point where the vessels touched. The 
Roman Senate and the people were accustomed to let the tribute 
which was due to them from their subjects for a stipulated sum. 

Jansen, in his Harmony of the Gospels , says, that persons who 
have carefully surveyed the Holy Land, assert that the spot where 
Matthew was called is still pointed out, outside of Capernaum, 
near the Sea. Mark and Luke say, that Matthew was sitting at 
the telonium^ because, by this word, they seem to mean not a 
house, but a table, on which they were counting the tribute money. 

Named Matthew . Matthew names himself, both out of humility, 
that he might confess to the whole world that he had been a 
publican and a sinner, and also out of gratitude, that he might 
make known abroad the exceeding grace of Christ towards him, 
just as S. Paul does : “ It is a faithful saying, and worthy of all 
acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, 
of whom I am chief." (i Tim. i. 15.) 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


360 


porphyry's cavil. 


Follow me: Whom in Capernaum thou hast heard preaching* 
heavenly doctrine, and confirming- it by many miracles, and 
especially by that recent healing of the paralytic. He calls 
Matthew, already subdued by the fame of His miracles, says 
Chrysostom. Observe the condescension of Christ who calls 
Matthew, the publican , and so a man infamous among the Jews, 
not only to grace but to His family and intimate friendship and 
Apostleship. 

And he arose , &c. Note here the efficacy of Christ's vocation, 
and the ready obedience of Matthew. Hear what S. Jerome says 
about it. “ Porphyry and Julian find fault in this place, either with 
the lying unskilfulness of the historian, or else with the folly of 
those persons who immediately followed the Saviour, as though 
they irrationally followed the first person who called them. But 
they do not consider that great miracles and mighty signs had 
preceded this calling. And there can be no doubt that the Apos- 
tles had witnessed these things before they believed. This at least 
is certain, the very refulgence and majesty of the hidden Divinity, 
which shone even in His human countenance, was able to attract 
to Him those who saw Him as soon as they beheld Him. For if 
there be in a magnet, which is but a stone, such force that it is 
able to attract, and join unto itself rings and straws, how much 
more is the Lord of all creatures able to draw unto Himself 
whom He will." 

Thus then as a magnet draws iron unto it, so did Christ draw 
Matthew, and by His drawing, gave him his virtues, and chiefly 
his exceeding love of God, zeal for souls, ardour in preaching. 
Listen to the account of S. Matthew's conversion, which he 
himself gave to S. Bridget, when praying at his tomb at Mai phi: 
** It was my desire at the time I was a publican to defraud no 
man, and I wished to find out a way by which I might abandon 
that employment, and cleave to God alone with my whole heart. 
When therefore He who loved me, even Jesus Christ was preach- 
ing, His call was a flame of fire in my heart ; and so sweet were 
His words unto my taste, that I thought no more of riches than of 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



SIGN OF TRUE CONVERSION. 


361 


straws : yea, it was delightful to me to weep for joy, that my God 
had deigned to call one of such small account, and so great a 
sinner as I to His grace. And as I clave unto my Lord, His 
burning words became fixed in my heart, and day and night I fed 
upon them by meditation, as upon sweetest food.” 

And it cam to pass as he sat at meat , &c. This was in Matthew's 
own house, for he is silent about his virtues, outspoken about his 
errors. This appears from what Luke says, Levi, that is, Matthew, 
made him a great feast in his own house: to this feast he invited 
many of his companions, publicans like himself, and sinners, that 
they might be drawn by the kindness of Christ to follow Him, as 
he had done. It is indeed a sign of true conversion to be anxious 
that others also should be converted from their sins. For good 
is self-diffusive, and charity instigates men to seek the salvation 
of other lost sinners. 

The office of a publican, although a just one in itself, and one 
that could be exercised without sin, yet, because avaricious men 
frequently undertook it from love of gain, who extorted unjust 
dues, especially from the poor, publicans were accounted infamous 
among the Jews, and public sinners, as public usurers are 
similarly accounted among Christians. There was this also, that 
the Jews maintained that they, as a people dedicated to God, 
ought not to pay tribute to the Romans, who were Gentiles and 
idolaters : for this was contrary to the liberty and dignity of the 
children of God. Thus they detested the publicans, who exacted 
the tribute. 

Sinners are here distinguished from publicans . These sinners 
seem to have been dissolute Jews, who cared little for the law and 
religion of the Jews, and lived in a heathenish manner, or who 
had apostatized to heathenism. 

And when the Pharisees saw it, &c. These are the words, not of 
those who asked a question, but of those who were making an 
accusation. As much as to say, “ Your Master Christ acts con- 
trary to the law of God and the traditions of the Fathers. Why 
do you listen to Him, and follow Him? He associates with 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



362 


GOD'S LOVE OF MERCY. 


sinners. He is bringing* the stain of their sins and infamy upon, 
you.” 

But when Jesus heard that , Sc c. : from the report of His disciples. 
For even the Pharisees did not dare to make this charge to 
Christ Himself. He saith , not to His disciples, but to the* 
Pharisees, for He turned Himself to those from whom the com- 
plaint proceeded, as is clear from what follows. They that are 
whole , &c. As a physician is not infected by the diseases of those 
who are sick, but rather overcometh diseases, and drives them 
away, and therefore it is not a disgrace, but an honour to a. 
physician to be associated with the sick, so in like manner I, who 
have been sent from heaven to earth by God the Father, to be a 
physician of sin-sick souls, am not contaminated by their sins- 
when I associate with them, but rather heal them, which is the 
highest praise to Me, and the greatest benefit to them. I therefore* 
am the Physician, not the companion of sinners. 

But go ye: that is, go away from Me; depart out of My sight* 
They are the words of one repudiating them. And learn, what 
Hosea says (vi. 6), I will have mercy and not sacrifice : i.e. f I prefer 
mercy to sacrifice, although sacrifice is the noblest act of religion. 
Therefore follow mercy, even as I do, that ye may save sinners^ 
For I prefer mercy, and to have pity upon miserable sinners^ 
rather than with you to offer victims to God. See what I have 
said upon Hosea vi. 6, where I have commented upon the dignity 
and surpassing excellency of mercy. 

Well does S. Bernard ( Serm . l6 in Cant.) exclaim, “ O Wisdom, 
with what art of healing, by wine and oil, dost Thou restore- 
health to my soul ! Thou art bravely sweet, and sweetly brave, 
brave for me, sweet to me. Thy name is oil poured forth, not 
wine. For I would not that Thou shouldst enter into judgment 
with Thy servant. It is oil, because thou crownest me with- 
mercy and loving kindness. It is indeed oil ; for oil floats at the* 
top of all liquids with which it is mingled: and thus it is a lively 
figure of that Name which is above every name.” 

For I came not to call the just but sinners . So it is in the Vulgate* 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



UNAUTHORIZED FASTS. 


363 


The G/eek adds, tU ixeravoLav, to repentance . So too S. Luke, and 
the Arabic Version. This must be either expressed or understood. 
For Christ also called Nathanael, who was a just man. Also He 
called the Blessed Virgin, S. John, and Elizabeth, who were 
saints, to still greater sanctity and perfection. 

Hilary, Jerome, Bede, &c., take the words differently, I cam 
not to call the righteous , that is, those who proudly, but falsely 
esteem and boast themselves to be righteous, when they are in 
very truth sinners and hypocrites, such as ye are, O ye 
Pharisees. 

Then came to him the disciples of John , &c. Then, signifies that it 
was shortly afterwards. The Pharisees being, therefore, upon just 
grounds, refuted by Christ, here frame another accusation against 
Him. They suborn the disciples of John, that by the occasion 
of fasting, practised by them in common with themselves, they 
might bring it as a charge against Christ, that neither He, nor 
His disciples fasted. Now this particular fast to which they refer 
was not prescribed by the Law, for Christ and His disciples ob- 
served the fasts as well as all the other requirements of the Law : 
but it was a fast, either appointed by the Jewish doctors, or else 
voluntarily taken up by their disciples at the exhortation of the 
doctors. Wherefore S. Luke relates that they said, Why d*> the 
disciples of John fast oft , and make prayers \ and likewise the disciples 
of the Pharisees , but Thine eat and drink ? It is as much as to say, 
“Thou wishest to be our Reformer, and a master of perfection: 
Why then do we fast, when Thou and Thine lead a genial life?” 
S. Mark speaks of the disciples of John, in connection with those 
of the Pharisees. This was because the Pharisees instigated 
John’s disciples to propose this question to Christ And this is 
the reason why S. Matthew in this place makes mention only of 
John’s disciples. They therefore press Christ with the authority of 
John the Baptist, which was very great among the Jews, but they 
do it in an unwarrantable and presumptuous manner. “This 
was a haughty interrogation,” says the Interlinear , “and full of 
Pharisaic pride. 1 ’ “Therefore,” says S. Jerome, “John’s disciples 


Digitized by CjOOQle 


364 


CHRIST THE BRIDEGROOM. 


are to be blamed, because of their boasting* about their fasting*, as 
because of their uniting* themselves to the Pharisees whom John had 
condemned ; also because they were calumniating* Him of whom 
John had preached." Moreover, the disciples of John said 
these things out of zeal for their master, and out of envy of 
Christ, preferring John to Him. This may be gathered from 
S. John iii. 26 . We may perceive a like jealousy in certain good 
men, even now, who busy themselves in extolling their own 
founder or patron above everybody else: but in this they are 
carnal and childish, and betray their own secret vanity and 
arrogance. For in thus extolling their master above others, they 
are really seeking to exalt themselves. Such were the Corinth- 
ians, who said, “I am of Paul, I of Cephas." Such the 
Apostle sharply rebukes, saying, “ When there is envy and 
contention among you, are ye not carnal and walk as men ?" 
(1 Cor. iii. 3.) 

And Jesus saith unto them , Can the children of the bridechamber , &c. 
The Bridegroom is Christ, because He hath betrothed human 
nature, and by it the Church, unto Himself, in the Incarnation, 
and hath united them unto Himself by a perpetual bond of mar- 
riage. This marriage Christ hath begun by grace on earth 
(Matt. xxii. 2), but He will consummate it in glory with His elect 
in heaven, where there shall be celebrated the endless marriage- 
feast of the Lamb (Apoc. xix. 7). Hence John the Baptist calls 
himself the friend of the Bridegroom (John iii. 29). And Christ's 
disciples, hearing this, knew that He was the Bridegroom. 

Children of the bridechamber . So it is in the Greek. But the Latin 
Vulgate has, sons of the bridegroom . The meaning of children of the 
bridechamber , is that they rejoice in the Bridegroom's marriage, 
and are accounted His familiar friends, and are admitted to His 
chamber and hear His secret counsels. By a similar Hebraism, 
they are called sons of obedience, who love obedience; sons of 
pride, who delight in pride. 

Mourn , by catachresis, for fast, because in mourning, men fast, 
and fasting makes men sad ; just as, on the contrary, food and - 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



HOW NOVICES SHOULD BE TREATED. 365 

wine make men jovial and cheerful. The meaning is, “ It is not 
wonderful that My disciples do not mourn and fast whilst they are 
enjoying Me and My nuptials. For at a wedding, modest banquets 
are becoming, fasting is unbecoming. But the sons of the Servant 
— that is, My servant John Baptist, who leads an austere life 
to bring men to repentance, and imposes the burdensome law of 
Moses upon his followers because it is still binding — grief and 
fasting, I say, become them ; for they, by means of sorrow and 
austere deeds of penance, are preparing the way for sinners to the 
joyful marriage supper of the Bridegroom, Christ. But Christ 
shall die, and be taken from them, and then shall His disciples 
mourn and fast. He alludes to the ancient custom of mourning 
for the dead, accompanied by fasting. Thus the Hebrews 
mourned for Saul, fasting seven days. 

Christ here intimates that novices in the faith and in religious 
orders must be gently and blandly treated, as being tender and 
but children in spirit, until they become matured in virtue, lest 
they should despair, or forsake the path of virtue on which they 
have entered. Thus S. Pachomius, who received the rule of his 
Order from an angel, directed novices to be instructed in it for 
three years, even as Christ fed His Apostles with milk, and 
instructed them in His school for three years. 

We are here reminded of that ancient good Abbot, who used to 
receive his guests to dine before the canonical hour for refection. 
When asked the reason, he said, “ Fasting, my brethren, is always 
with me, but since I am about to send you away, I cannot have 
you with me always. Since, therefore, I receive Christ in you, I 
ought to refresh you ; and when I shall have set you on your way, 

1 shall be able, by myself, to make up for deferring my fasting.” 
So Cassian and Sulpitius relate. 

Moreover, after Christ’s death, the Apostles often fasted, and 
suffered from hunger and thirst, as S. Paul relates at length, 

2 Cor. xi. So in the Life of S. Peter we read that he did severe 
penance, and ate only bread with olives. 

Hence, also, in the Eastern Church, says S. Epiphanius {Hares, 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


366 


THE NEW CLOTH. 


75), Christians fast on Wednesdays and Fridays. So they still do in 
Greece, Poland, and Holland. In other parts of the Western Church 
they abstain from flesh on Fridays and Saturdays. These customs 
arose because on Wednesday the Bridegroom was betrayed to 
the Jews by Judas, on Friday He was crucified, and on Saturday 
He lay in the tomb. Epiphanius adds that formerly on fasting 
days Christians ate nothing but bread and salt, with water, and 
that this was enjoined by a decree of the Apostles. 

Tropologically , S. Jerome says, "When Christ the Bridegroom 
departed from us on account of sins, then especially must grief 
and fasting be undergone.” 

But SS. Hilary and Ambrose say, we have Christ the Bride* 
groom with us, and we continually feed on His Body in the 
Eucharist. But those to whom the Bridegroom is not present, 
present, that is, by grace, such as those who are living in deadly 
sin, keep a perpetual fast, because they lack the Bread of Life. 
S. Ambrose, explaining the words of Christ, The Bridegroom 
shall be taken away from them , says, “ No one can take Christ from 
thee, unless thou takest thyself away from Him.” 

No man putteth a piece of new cloth 9 &c. Note I, for piece of clothe 
the Greek has hnfikrtfia, an addition , a patch. S. Augustine and 
Tertullian call it plagula . Others call it a little rag, what is called 
in Italian, un pezzo . Whence S. Francis desired his Brothers to 
wear patched garments, like paupers. For thus we see beggars 
wearing clothes made of many and divers-coloured patches, which 
you might reckon up to the number of a hundred. Hence they 
are called centos. 

Of new , ayva<f>o<;, cloth , that is, unfilled, uncombed \ uncorded cloth — 
cloth such as is brought by the weavers to be prepared and dyed. 
S. Luke has, commissuram a novo vestimento 9 " a patch off a new 
garment.” For such is a new and rough rag. Whence the 
Italians call clothes, rags. 

That which is put in to fill it up. The Greek and the Vulgate 
have, its plenitude; by which Christ means, its integrity. For if you 
sew a piece of new cloth on to an old garment, you will take 


Digitized by 


Google 



THE NEW LAW* 


367 

Away its integrity, so that it will no longer seem one garment 
but two, partly old, partly new. 

Note 2, the meaning of the parable is this: If an ancient 
garment be torn, it should be mended with the like old cloth, not 
with new. For if the new patch be sewed on to the old cloth, the 
garment is no longer whole and homogeneous, but multiform and 
heterogeneous, and so deformed and spoilt. 

And the rent is made worse , that is, than it was before, when the 
garment was torn ; worse , because of the division of the old parts 
from the other old parts, by the intervention of the new patch* 
Therefore the rent is made worse , because what has been added to it 
to mend it, tears it still more. Thus it is again cut out, and so there 
is a still greater rent. 

In a similar way, Cicero said of Julius Caesar, when he wished 
to decorate certain unworthy persons with Senatorial dignity, 
“ Them he did not adorn, but brought disgrace upon the honours 
themselves.” 

Note 3, the parable is connected with the matter in hand, as 
follows : “ As no one sews a new patch on an old garment, but 
attaches new to new, old to old, so I, who am the most prudent 
Physician of souls, perceiving the ancient and ingrained habits of 
My disciples, as it were an old garment, and their infirmity as old 
bottles, do not, as yet, impose upon them hard and rigid penances and 
fasts, since they are not prescribed by the Law, but are voluntary ^ 
lest also the fruit of My teaching should be lost to them, and they, 
being moved to despair, should forsake Me and My teaching : but 
I am waiting until they shall be renewed by the Heavenly Spirit, 
whom I will send down at Pentecost, that, oldness and weakness 
being laid aside, they may undertake new austerities and new fasts. 
And this they shall do, not by compulsion, or from fear of punish- 
ment, like the Jews, but voluntarily, and out of love. For the 
New Law of Christ is one of liberty and love, as the Old Law was 
one of fear and servitude/' That the Apostles, after Pentecost, 
kept frequent fasts, is plain from Acts xiii. 2, 3 ; 2 Cor. xi. 27; Acts 
xxvii. 9, Ac. So Euthymius, Theophylact, Maldonatus, Jansen, 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


368 


HEW BOTTLES. 


and others explain this passage. Less appositely Tertullian, 
(lib. de Oral. c. i, and lib. 3 contra Marc . c. 15) by old garments 
and old skins understands the Old Law, by the rough and new 
patch the New Law, or the Gospel. For the New Law hath re- 
formed the Old, and as it were made it new. For precisely and 
adequately, by the old garment and the new, the Apostles are 
meant, who as yet, from their old habit of eating and living 
freely, were old, but were to be renewed at Pentecost by th* 
spirit of temperance and austerity. 

Neither do men put new wine \ &c. Christ shows by a threefold 
similitude, that His disciples must not fast when He was present. 
I . By the parable of the Spouse and the wedding. 2. Of the old and 
new garment. 3. Of the new wine, and the old bottles of skin. The 
sense is this : " As new wine, or must, by the violence of its ferment- 
ing spirit, and its heat, bursts the old skins, because they are worn 
and weak, and so there is a double loss, both of wine and skins ; 
therefore new wine must be poured into new skins, that, being strong, 
they may be able to bear the force of the must : so in like manner, 
new austerities and fasts must not be imposed as yet upon My dis- 
ciples, lest their spirits should be broken, and they depart from Me; 
But I wait for the coming of the Holy Ghost at Pentecost/’ 

Truly, saith Horace, “ Unless the vessel be clean, it will taint 
whatever you pour into it.” So also a pure and perfect life agrees 
not except with a mind cleansed from vices, pure and renewed. 
Otherwise both the austerity and the mind itself are full of sour- 
ness and bitterness. 

An old proverb is similar to this parable, “A new sieve, 
a new peg,” which Nonias quotes from Varro’s Eumemdes , where 
Zeno is said to have first hung a new sect upon a new peg, because 
Zeno founded at Athens a new sect of the Stoics, which he did by 
new reasonings and paradoxes. There is also the proverb, “ A 
new swallow, a new' spring.” Whence the Rhodians, on the 
testimony of Theognis, by yearly public proclamation, invite the 
swallows in the spring-time, “ Come, come, O swallow, and bring 
us a good season and a prosperous year.” 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



JAIRUS* DAUGHTER. 


369 

While he spake these things, &c. A ruler ; namely, of the syna- 
gogue, as Luke adds, who presided over the synagogue in 
Capernaum. For these things took place by the shore of the sea 
of Galilee, near Capernaum, as is plain from Mark v. 21, 22. 
Mark speaks of him as one of the rulers of the synagogue, for 
there were several rulers of the same synagogue, who taught and 
guided the people who assembled in it, in the same way that 
priests do now in churohes. His name was Jairus, as Mark 
records. This is the same as the Hebrew fair, meaning, that 
which shall be resplendent, or shall give light, from the root "V)K or, 
“he hath shone.” For Jairus, as the ruler of the synagogue, illumi- 
nated the people, and taught the Law. 

Worshipped him, that is, fell at his feet, as Mark and Luke 
have it. 

My daughter, twelve years old , a^s Luke says, is even now dead, but 
come . Matthew, studying brevity, relates in subs tance what was 
done, rather than the exact historical sequence. For, as is plain 
from Mark and Luke, the child was not yet dead when her father 
first came to Christ and said, Come and lay thine hand upon her, 
and she shall live . As Christ and Jairus were going together, some 
one ran, and told Jairus that his daughter was dead, and that the 
case being now desperate, he should come away from Christ. 
Then Christ as it would seem, confirms his wavering faith, and 
Jairus hopefully leads Him to his house, and then, either by impli- 
cation, or else in 'express words, asks Him lo raise his daughter 
from death, as Matthew here relates. 

S. Chrysostom and Theophylact explain differently. She is dead \ 
i.e., she is near death, for in this way those who are wretched, are 
wont to exaggerate their miseries, that they may more easily 
obtain the aid for which they seek. S. Austin (lib. 2 de Consens. 
Evang . c. 28), adds, that the father by reckoning the time which 
his journey had taken, might suppose that she, whom he had left 
in her last agony, was now dead. 

But come, lay thine hand . Jairus had seen, or heard of many 

sick who had been healed at Capernaum by the laying on 

2 B 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



37 ® 


THE MINSTRELS. 


of hands; and he hoped that Christ would do the same for his 
daughter. The faith of Jairus was less than that of the centurion, 
for he believed that Christ, even when absent, could heal his 
servant by a word. 

And Jesus arose. It is probable that Christ was sitting and 
teaching the multitude when He rose up at the request of Jairus. 
Observe the readiness and promptitude of Christ to succour the 
afflicted. Let Christians imitate Him in this. S. Chrysostom 
adds, that when Christ first went with Jairus, He proceeded some- 
what slowly, and conversed for some time with the woman with 
the issue of blood, that in the meantime the girl might die, and 
that there might be a manifest proof of the resurrection. 

Behold, \ a woman , &c. She was from Caesarea, a place called 
Dan, afterwards Paneas. We learn this . from Eusebius ( H. E. 
7. 14). S. Mark relates at greater length this history of the 
healing of the woman. It will therefore be more convenient to 
speak of it in the Commentary upon his Gospel (chap. v.). 

And when Jesus came , &c. Minstrels were persons who, as 
S. Ambrose says {in S. Luc . c. 8. 52), were hired at funerals, to 
chant doleful ditties, by which they moved the relations and 
neighbours to sobbing and tears. There were women minstrels 
as well as men. Jeremiah speaks of the former (ix. 17), “ Call for 
the mourning women, that they may come, and let them make 
haste, and take up a wailing for us, that our eyes may run down 
with tears, and our eyelids gush out with water.” This was not 
only a Jewish custom : it was also common among the Gentiles. 

Minstrels. Gr. flute-players. Theophylact says, that the ancients 
at the funerals of men sounded with trumpets ; but at the funerals 
of boys and virgins played upon flutes, as in this case of the 
daughter of Jairus. This was done, he says, in token of their 
virginity. 

He said \ Give place, &c. The girl was really dead, as is plain 
from verse 18. Christ, however, denied this, and said that she 
was asleep. 1. Because as S. Jerome says, to God and Himsel( 
to whom all things live, she was not dead, and because she was to 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



SLEEPING IN THIS LORD. 


371 


be raised again at the Judgment Day, Wherefore the dead are 
continually called in the Scriptures, those who sleep . 2. And 

better, because this girl was not dead in the sense in which the 
multitude thought her dead, namely, altogether and absolutely 
dead, as though it were not possible for her to be recalled to life, 
when by the extraordinary providence of God that very thing was 
shortly about to be done. Thus she was not so much really dead, 
as sleeping for a little while. Thus too, when Lazarus was dead, 
Christ speaks of him as sleeping, (John xi. 1 1.) So Maldonatus, 
Jansen, and others explain. Moreover the soul of this deceased 
girl, like the souls of others whom Christ and His saints have 
raised from the dead, was not yet judged, or condemned to hell, 
or purgatory. But God’s judgment was suspended, because it was 
His will to bring her back to life. 

S. Chrysostom adds, Christ shows by this expression that it 
was as easy to Him to raise the dead, as to awake men out of 
sleep, and therefore we should not fear death, for when He comes 
nigh, it is no longer death but sleep. 

And they laughed him to scorn , &c. Christ, says Chrysostom, 
permitted this, that the girl’s death might be better attested, 
and so the greater the belief in Him when He did raise her from 
death. 

But when the people were put forth , he went in, with, says S. Mark, 
the parents of the child, and Peter, James, and John. Christ put forth 
the crowd, because they were not worthy, says the Interlinear, to 
see that which they would not believe. S. Jerome says, they 
were unworthy to behold the mystery of the resurrection, who 
had derided Him who was about to raise. Christ teaches us 
when we are doing some great work, to avoid multitudes and 
tumult, which distract the mind, that we may give the full force 
of our mind to our work and to prayer. 

Tropologically, S. Gregory says, u That the dead soul may arise, 
the multitude of worldly cares must be cast out of the heart." 

Symbolically, the Gloss says, “ When the scornful deriders have 
been rejected, Christ enters into the minds of the elect." 


Digitized by L^ooQle 


372 


ALLEGORY OF THE CHURCH. 


Anagogicculy , S. Hilary : “ How few are the elect may be under- 
stood from the multitude being cast out.” 

Took her by the hand \ That is, like a magistrate He laid His 
hand upon the corpse, as upon one who was guilty. He seizes it, 
•and conquers it, and, as though it were a captive, He subjugates 
it to Himself. The Greek is iKpdrq<r€, and the word denotes the 
efficacy of the power and empire of Christ. He held the hand of 
the dead body, as though ruling and commanding it, and so 
mightily operating upon it as to raise it from death unto life. For 
by His hand He raised the body from the earth, and recalled the 
soul into it from the unseen world, saying to it in Syriac, Talitha 
cumi— that is, Maid, arise . “For as the Father raiseth up the dead 
and quickeneth them, even so the Son giveth life to whom he will.” 
(John v. 21.) 

And the maid arose . Greek fjytpQr ) — was roused up, and 
awoke. Christ raised her to life, as easily as if He were waking 
one who was asleep. 

Mark adds, And he commanded that something should be given her 
to tat . This was that the resurrection might be seen to be real. 

And the fame hereof .... into all that land — that is, into 
the whole of Galilee. All men spread abroad the news, and cele- 
brated this resurrection of the maid by Christ, speaking of it as a 
new, unheard of, and Divine work. And in so doing they preached 
Christ, that He was a prophet — yea, the Messiah. 

SS. Hilary, Ambrose, and Jerome say that these things are an 
allegory of the Church. The woman with the issue of blood, 
who received health and the salvation of her soul before the 
daughter of the chief of the synagogue, or the Jews, is the people 
of the Gentiles ; for after the fulness of the Gentiles has entered 
into the Church, the Jews shall be converted, and saved at the end 
of the world. Whence the Gloss says, Jairus — illuminating, 
or illuminated, is Moses, who, beholding the Lord about to come 
in the flesh, prays for his daughter — that is, the Synagogue, who, 
brought up by the Law and the Prophets, languishing in error, is 
dead in sins, but nevertheless is in the house — that is, in the 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



WHOM CHRIST RAISED TO LIFE. 


373 


worship of God. And S. Jerome says, "Even until tills day, the 
Synagogue lies dead, and they who seem to be teachers — the 
Jewish Rabbin — are flute-players and minstrels, singing a mourn- 
ful chant ; and the Jews are not a multitude of believers, but of 
people making a noise.” 

Tropclogically , both the woman healed of the issue of blood, 
and Jairus’ daughter raised from the dead, denote the sinful soul, 
which Christ raises from the death of sin to the life of grace ; but 
first, the friends and minstrels must be driven out — that is, the 
depraved companions and the w icked spirits ; for they soothe the 
soul with their dittie6, and detain it in the death of sin. They 
make flattering suggestions. They chant that sin is not deadly, 
or that some indulgence must be granted to youth, that all may be 
atoned for by repentance when old, and so on. Thus Christ 
touches the soul. By His mighty power He takes her by the 
hand, gives her life, and raises her up from the deep of death to 
the summit of life. By-and-by she is bidden to walk , that is, 
do good works; and to eat , that is, to feed on the Eucharist, that it 
may strengthen and confirm her life. 

Only the three chief Apostles are present, that it may be signi- 
fied that Christ, by the Apostles and their successors, will raise 
sinners from death ; and that this is the prime and chid* power of 
the Apostles, concerning which Christ saith, "Receive ye the Holy 
Ghost, whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; 
and whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained.” (Johnxx. 23.) 

Lastly, Christ is recorded to have raised three dead persons 
only to life — first, this maid of twelve years old, whom He raised 
immediately upon her decease. The second was the young man, 
the widow’s son, whom He raised as he was being carried to the 
tomb. The third w f as Lazarus, whom He called out of his sepul- 
chre, after he had lain there four days. 

First, the young girl denotes those who from age — for young 
people are fervid and inexperienced — or from frailness, or from 
infirmity, fall into sin, but very soon, being touched by God, see 
their fall, and easily repent, and rise again. Secondly, the 


Digitized by e.ooQle 


374 


SHARP-SIGHTED BLINDNESS, 


young- man denotes those who have fallen repeatedly into sin, and 
are verging* upon a habit of sin. These are with more difficulty 
recalled to life. They need more powerful and efficacious grace. 
So it came to pass that Christ commanded the bearers of the young 
man to stand still. And touching the bier, He said in a com- 
manding manner, Young man , I say unto thee , Arise, Thirdly, 
Lazarus denotes those who have grown old in sin. These are 
with great difficulty recalled. They need the most efficacious 
grace and vocation of God. And the symbol or indication of 
this, was Christ's groaning, weeping, and crying with a loud voice, 
Lazarus , come forth . Therefore Rabanus and others think that, 
symbolically, by the raising of the girl is meant the repentance of 
one who has only sinned in thought : by the young man, the re- 
pentance of those who have sinned in deed as well as in thought : 
by Lazarus, their repentance, who have contracted a habit and 
practice of sin. Lastly, Christ here teaches that secret and light 
sins are blotted out by secret repentance, and therefore the girl was 
raised in the house. But public sins need a public remedy, there- 
fore he recalled the young man and Lazarus to life publicly, 
before multitudes. 

And passing on from thence , ije^ from Jairus’ house, two blind men , &c. 
These blind men hadconceived the hope of recovering their sight 
from Christ from the many and great miracles which they had 
heard were done by Him. Therefore they said, Have mercy upon us, 
pity our blindness, w'hich is the greatest misery, and restore to us 
the light of the sun. We believe that Thou art the Son of David, 
that is, the Messiah, to whom this healing of blindness and 
other diseases has been promised by the Prophets. (Is. xxxv. 
5 ; lxi. i.) For Messiah had been promised to David as his 
Son, that He should be sprung from his posterity. Wherefore 
Messiah was always called by the Jews, the Son of David . There- 
fore these men, whose bodily eyes were blind, had sharp-sighted 
minds, as a certain writer exclaims, “ O that darkness brighter 
than any light : O those most piercing eyes of blindness 1 ” 

And when he was come into the house , &c. The house , that is to 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



XRR0R OP LUTHER. 


37S 


say, His own, which Christ had hired at Capernaum, as I have 
said on chap. iv. 13. Christ did not answer the blind men as they 
cried unto Him in the way, and asked their sight He put them 
off until He came into the house, 1. That He might prove 
them, and kindle their faith and desire of healing. 2. That He 
might teach the necessity of persevering in prayer. Believe ye , He 
says, that I am able to do thist He does not say, that I am about 
to do it ? but, that I am able to do it t For faith is properly in the 
Omnipotence of God. This is why we say in the Creed, “I 
believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and 
earth.” This faith then gave rise to hope, insomuch that these 
blind men conceived the hope that what Christ was able to do, 
that He would do. Away then with the faith of the Innovators, by 
which they believe, that their sins have been forgiven to them- 
selves in particular, for the merits of Christ, and that they are 
justified, and sons of God. They believe, I say, in their own 
false imagination, by which they say that they most firmly believe 
it by Divine faith, when they only imagine it, and dream of it. 
For nothing can be believed, except what has been revealed by 
God. But it has not been revealed to thee, O Luther, that thou 
art justified (jusiuni ), therefore thou canst not believe it. 

Then he touched their eyes , &c. Christ heal* them by the touch qf 
His hands, to manifest their saving power. “ The confession of 
their mouth is requited by the touch of kindness,” says the 
Gloss . 

And Jesus straitly charged them . The Greek is, b'tftpmyTaro, the 
Vulgate commmatus est: which means literally, He sharply and 
sternly threatened them . He did this to show His 9trong dislike of 
ostentation in His miracles, and of vain glory, and to teach us to 
dislike it. 

But they spread abroad his fame m all that counity. These blind 
men did not offend against the strict charge of Christ by publish- 
ing His miracle, as Calvin would have it, for they persuaded 
themselves that Christ had done so, not by an absolute precept, but 
only out of modesty, for the reason I have given. And no wonder 


Digitized by e^ooQle 



37 $ 


THE DUMB MAH. 


that the blind men thought so, for the Fathers are persuaded that 
Christ spoke in this sense. Hear S. Chrysostom : “ To another 
He says, Declare the glory of God; surely He teaches that they are 
to be rebuked, who wish to praise us for our own sakes, but not 
if they do so for the glory of God.” And S. Jerome says, “ The 
Lord, because of humility, avoiding the glory of boasting, gave 
this command ; but they, in remembrance of His grace, were not 
able to keep silent about His kindness.” 

They brought to him a dumb man possessed with a devil . Gr. Kwf>bv, 
which rather means deaf than dumb , but the word, says S. Jerome, 
is used indifferently, in both senses, in Scripture. For they who 
are deaf from their birth, are usually dumb ; tor they who cannot 
hear anything, are not able to learn sounds and words, so as to 
speak them. For we only learn what we hear. Wherefore Christ 
did not require faith from this man as He did from others. So S. 
Chrysostom, Theophylact 

Moreover, the word dumb is not to be referred to the devil, as 
Cajetan thinks, but to the man, as is clear from the Greek &upo- 
vi£ 6 fuvcv. The Syriac translation makes this plain, They offered unto 
him a dumb man, in whom was a demon. This was a different 
demoniac from the one of whom Luke speaks (xi. 14), for of this 
latter Matthew speaks below (xii. 22). Here Christ fulfilled 
the prophecy of Isaiah concerning Him (chap, xxxv.), “Then 
shall the eyes of the blind be opened, and the ears of the deaf 
shall be unstopped, and the tongue of the dumb shall sing.” 

And when the devil was cast out, the dumb spake . From this it 
appears that the demon made this man deaf and dumb, who was 
not so naturally. He did this by hindering the use of his tongue 
and ears, so that, when he was cast out, the dumb man both 
spake and heard. How wonderful was the benignity and mercy 
of Christ by which He made whole a man who neither asked 
nor thought about it — yea, who was unable either to speak or 
think, tor he was possessed by a devil — simply at the prayer of 
those who brought him. Verily, wheresoever there is greatest 
affliction, there are most nigh the mercy and help of Christ, 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



JESUS PREACHES IN VILLAGES. 377 

according- to the words, “The abyss'* of our misery, “calls to 
the abyss ” of the Divine mercy. (Ps. xlii. 7.) 

The multitudes marvelled, saying, &c. Neither Moses nor Elias, 
nor Isaiah, nor any other of the prophets, performed so many and 
so great miracles as Jesus did. Therefore He was greater than 
they, and so was the Messias, or Christ. They preferred Christ, 
says S. Chrysostom, to all others, because He quickly healed an 
infinite number of incurable diseases. 

But the Pharisees said, He casteth out devils through the prince of the 
devils . As among the angels, so also among the devils, some are 
lower, others higher in rank, and princes, viz., those of the higher 
orders who fell, who were of a grander nature ; for that which 
was theirs naturally remained in the devils after their fall. Thus 
those who fell of the Seraphim, the Cherubim, and the Thrones 
are princes among the lower orders of the Dominions, the Princi* 
palities, and the Powers ; and these again are princes over the in- 
ferior fallen orders of Virtues, Archangels, and Angels. Thus even 
among rebel soldiers there are standard-bearers, colonels, captains. 
For without these an army cannot be marshalled and governed. 
Lucifer is the prince of all the devils, as S. Michael is ot all the 
angels, as I have said on Apoc. xii. Observe the different disposiw 
tions of the Pharisees and the multitude. The multitude, with 
artless candour, magnified the miracles of Christ as done by a 
Divine Person, even the Messiah. But the Pharisees were envious 
of Christ, and had indignation against Him, and said that He was 
a magician, and had a familiar demon, by whose magic art He 
did these wonderful things. This was the awful blasphemy which 
Christ refutes in chap xii. 25. But now, meekly bearing and 
despising their charges, He proceeds in His course of doing good, 
and confutes their blasphemies by fresh miracles. 

And Jesus went about all the cities and villages, &c. Villages, in the 
Vulgate, castella . Castrum is a place surrounded by walls, and is 
greater than a castle and less than a town, from whence the 
diminutive caslellum means a little lawn . These castella, then, 

were torts, or small walled towns; and the meaning became 

2 c 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



37^ the spiritual harvest. 

extended to signify villages without walk, which the Greeks cail 

#ca>AUZ9. 

Christ visited pot only inhabitants of cities, and those who were 
had in honour, but poor men and rustics dwelling in villages, and 
taught and healed them. Let priests and religious imitate this 
example of Christ. Desire not, O preacher, to hold forth in the 
magnificent cathedrals of great cities, for Christ taught in 
villages, as well as in cities, and thus He was the Catechist and 
Preacher, as well as the Redeemer, of the sparsely scattered and 
poor rustics. 

But when he saw the multitudes , &c. Had compassion , the Greek 
is l<nr\ayxyur$rj, that is, pitted them from His inmost bowels . This 
is the same word, as to its use, as the Hebrew Dm rechem, " bowels/* 
and so, mercifulness . 

As sheep having no shepherd \ There is no animal so simple^ 
careless, improvident, so exposed to be the prey of wolves and 
other wild beasts, and therefore so needing a keeper, as a sheep. 
Christ takes notice that the Scribes and priests, did not care for 
the good of the people, to lead them in the way of salvation. 
And so they were not pastors, but shearers of the sheep, who 
only cared for the milk and the fleece, that is, for what profit they 
could make out of the people. The Scribes, says S. Chrysostom, 
were not so much shepherds of the sheep as wolves, for in word 
they taught them false and perverse doctrines, and by their 
example they destroyed the souls of the simple ones, especially 
in that they called Christ a magician, and so alienated from Him 
the minds of those who were well disposed to Him. 

The harvest truly is plenteous , &c. The harvest He calls the 
multitude of the people prepared to receive the Gospel, the seeds 
of which the Prophets had sown. Whence, as S. Austin saith, 
“ the holy Apostles reaped among the Jews, but sowed among the 
Gentiles, oecause they delivered to them the first doctrines of the 
faith, as it were seed.” 

Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest , &c., namely, that He 
would send you, O ye Apostles, and your co-adjutors and 


Digitized by L^ooQle 



■jfHE LORD OF THE HARVEST* 


379 


successors, and inspire them with the spirit of wisdom and zeal, 
assiduously to preach and to labour, that this so copious a harvest 
perish not 

The Lord of the harvest . Thus, tacitly, Christ calls Himself. 

As S. Chrysostom says, the Lord sent His Apostles to reap that 
which He Himself had sown by the Prophets. Remigius adds, 
The number ot labourers was increased by the appointment of 
seventy-two other disciples. 

Here ends the early manhood of Christ and His Acts from His 
Baptism and first Passover until His second Passover. That is to 
say, it is the history of one year and some months. This was the 
thirty-first year of Christ's age. 


F-ND of vol. ». 


Printed by Ballanttne, Hanson Co. 
Edinburgh London 


Digitized by i^ooole 



ALDERMAN LIBRARY 

The return of this book Is due on the date 
indicated below 


DUE 


DUE 


Usually books are lent out for two weeks, but 
there are exceptions and the borrower should 
note carefully the date stamped above. Fines 
are charged for over-due books at the rate of 
five cents a day; for reserved books there are 
special rates and regulations. Books must be 
presented at the desk if renewal is desired. 
L-l 


Digitized tfy 


Google 



Digitized by Google 


DATE DUE 






