This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized 
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the 
information in books and make it universally accessible. 

Google" books 

http://books.google.com 




LIBRARY OF THE 
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA 



GIFT OF 


J. Douglas Bruce 
"Staunton Hill" 
Virginia 















)g!e 





Digitized by 


Catholic StanOarD library 


VOLUME TWO 


THE GREAT COMMENTARY 

OF 

CORNELIUS A LAPIDE 


Digitized by 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



THE 


GREAT COMMENTARY 

OF 

CORNELIUS A LAPIDE 

TRANSLATED BY 

THOMAS W. MOSSMAN, B.A., 

RECTOR OF TORRJNGTOIf, LINCOLNSHIRE 

ASSISTED BY VARIOUS SCHOLARS 

»*I V! 1 t - " «• • 

S. MATTHEW’S GOSPEL.— CHAPS. X TO XXI 

FOURTH EDITION 


EDINBURGH: JOHN GRANT 

31 GEORGE IV. BRIDGE 

1908 


Digitized by Google 



"2-&SS 

.3 

.L2.3 
V r l 

\j . 2- 


Digitized by 


PREFACE. 


In presenting to the reader the Second Volume of this Translation 
of the great work of Cornelius & Lapide, I desire to mention that 
it has not been within my purpose to give an equivalent for every 
word of the original. This ought to have been stated at the com- 
mencement of the first volume, and I greatly regret the omission. 

The stem exigencies of publication have compelled me to com- 
press the translation of the Commentary upon the Gospels within 
five octavo volumes, when a reproduction of the Latin original, 
verbatim et literatim , would have probably necessitated seven. 

The matter standing thus, I have had to exercise my own judg- 
ment as to the character of the necessary omissions and compression. 
I am perfectly aware that in omitting or compressing anything at 
all, I expose myself to the full fury of the blasts of unkind, bitter, 
cr unscrupulous criticism ; though criticism of this kind has, I am 
thankful to say, been confined to a single print 

I have no fault whatever to find with the criticism of the R. 
Catholic Tablet . It was dictated by a thoroughly honest and 

commendable, but certainly mistaken fear, that I had made omissions 
for controversial purposes. Of this, I hope I am incapable. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



vi 


PREFACE. 


With regard to the other adverse criticism to which I have alluded, 
I am sorry that I cannot regard it as either just or righteous. One 
reason is this ; the reviewer in question concludes his remarks by 
saying — “Those who are familiar with Cornelius* work are aware 
of the terseness and pungency of the authors style. Whether it 
would be possible to give this in English we cannot say, but the 
present translators do not appear to have even attempted the 
task, either in their literal rendering, or in their paraphrased 
passages, so that much of the sententiousness of the original has 
evaporated.” 

It would be almost impossible to single out from the whole range 
of the history of criticism a more telling example of its frequent 
utter worthlessness and disregard of a strict adherence to truth. In 
the first place, with regard to Cornelius himself, those who are best 
acquainted with him — his greatest lovers and admirers — are aware 
that if there is one thing more than another which they are disposed 
to regret, it is his great prolixity, and the inordinate length of his 
sentences. 

Secondly, if the hostile reviewer had examined my translation 
solely for the purposes of an honest criticism, he could not have 
helped becoming aware of the fact that there is scarcely a page in 
which I have not broken up what is a single sentence in the 
Latin into two, three, and sometimes even more sentences in the 
English. 

Lastly, I need not tell scholars that it would be far more easy 
and pleasant to myself to translate literally, without any omission 
whatever, than to have continually to be, as it were, upon the 
stretch to omit or compress what must be omitted, when very often 
all seems valuable. I can truly say I have often spent as much 
time in deliberating what to omit, or how to compress a passage* 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



PREFACE. 


VII 


as would have sufficed to have written a translation of it in full 
twice over. 

About two-thirds of the twenty-first chapter of S. Matthew, the 
last in this second volume, have been translated without any omission, 
or compression whatever. A note is appended to the place where 
this unabridged translation begins. This will enable any one who 
cares to do so, to compare the abridged portion with the unabridged • 
and both with the original 

T. W. M. 


Digitized by 


Google 



Digitized by 



SAINT MATTHEWS GOSPEL. 


CHAPTER X. 

The Apostles are sent to do Miracles , and to preach . 

A ND when he had called unto him his twelve disciples, he gave them power 
against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness 
and all manner of disease. 

2 Now the names of the twelve apostles are these ; The first, Simon, who is 
called Peter, and Andrew his brother ; James the son of Zebedee, and John his 
brother; 

3 Philip, and Bartholomew ; Thomas, and Matthew the publican ; James the 
son of Alphseus, and Lebbseus, whose surname was Thaddaeus ; 

4 Simon the Canaanite, and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him. 

5 These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them, saying, Go not into the 
way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not : 

6 But go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel 
7 And as ye go, preach, saying, The kingdom of heaven is at hand. 

8 Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils : freely ye 
have received, freely give. 

9 Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses, 
io Nor scrip for your journey, neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet staves : 
for the workman is worthy of his meat. 

1 1 And into whatsoever city or town ye shall enter, enquire who in it is worthy ; 
and there abide till ye go thence. 

12 And when you come into an house, salute it 

13 And if the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it : but if it be not 
worthy, let your peace return to you. 

14 And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye depart 
out of that house or city, shake off the dust of your feet 

15 Verily I say unto you. It shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and 
Gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for that city. 

16 V Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves : be ye therefore 
wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. 

17 But beware of men 1 for ihey will deliver you up to the councils, and they 
will scourge you in their synagogues 5 

18 And ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a 
testimony against them and the Gentiles. 

VOL. U. B 


Digitized by 


Google 



2 


19 But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak : 
for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak. 

20 For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh 
in you. 

21 And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the 
child : and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be 
put to death. 

22 And ye shall be hated of all mm for my name’s sake : but he that endureth 
to the end shall be saved. 

23 But when they persecute you in this city, flee ye into another : for verily I 
say unto you, Ye shall not have gone over the cities of Israel, till the Son of man 
be come. 

24 The disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his lord. 

25 It is enough for the disciple that he be as his master, and the servant as his 
lord. If they have called the master of the house Beezlebub, how much more 
shall they call them of his household ? 

26 Fear them not therefore : for there is nothing covered that shall not be 
revealed ; and hid, that shall not be known. 

27 What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in light : and what ye hear in 
he ear, that preach ye upon the house-tops. 

28 And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul : 
but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell. 

29 Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not fall on 
the ground without your Father. 

30 But the very hairs of your head are all numbered. 

31 Fear ye not therefore ; ye are of more value than muiy sparrows. 

32 Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess also 
before my Father which is in heaven. 

33 But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my 
Father which is in heaven. 

34 Think not that I am come to send peace on earth : I came not to send 
peace, but a sword. 

35 For I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and the daughter 
against her mother, and the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law. 

36 And a man’s foes shall be they of his own household. 

37 He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me : and he 
that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me. 

38 And he that taketh not his cross, and followeth after me, is not worthy of 
me. 

39 He that flndeth his life shall lose it : and he that loseth his life for my sake 
shall find it 

40 H He that receiveth you receiveth me, and he that receiveth me receiveth 
him that sent me. 

41 He that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet shall receive a prophet’s 
reward ; and he that receiveth a righteous man in the name of a righteous man 
shall receive a righteous man’s reward. 

42 And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones a cup of cold 
water only in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise 
lose his reward. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



POWERS OF THE APOSTLES, 


3 


And when He had called \ &c. Observe that Christ, out of all His 
disciples, chose principally twelve, as S. Luke shows more at length 
(xvL 13.) He chose twelve Apostles that they should be His chief 
legates, whom He invested with plenary authority and power, and 
sent them forth into all the world to proclaim His Gospel unto all 
nations. He chose also seventy-two others ; but these He called dis- 
ciples, not Apostles, although they too, are spoken of by ancient writers 
as Apostles, that is legates or ambassadors of Christ And such in 
fact they were, but with less power, as being subject and subordinate 
to the twelve Apostles. These twelve Christ now sends forth, that 
they may begin to discharge the office to which they were called, 
that they may serve their novitiate under Himself as their master, 
that afterwards being made priests and bishops, they may after His 
death fully accomplish their office and ministry. Wherefore Christ 
made the Apostles the Princes of His Church, and superior to all the 
faithful, both martyrs, confessors, and virgins, not only in office and 
dignity, but also in grace and sanctity. For upon them he has 
founded His Church, as we may learn from Ephesians ii. 20, and 
Rev. xxi. 19. 

Moreover the power of the Apostles was the greatest in the 
Church, far greater than that of Bishops ; for the Apostles were 
chosen and sent forth directly by Christ the Lord, as it were legates 
a latere of Christ, with absolute power through the whole world, not 
only to preach the Gospel, and confirm it by miracles, but also by 
writing. For the Apostles had the power of writing canonical books 
(as in fact Matthew and John wrote Gospels), canonical epistles and 
the Apocalypse. They also had power to found churches everywhere* 
and to institute and ordain priests and bishops, and the whole hier- 
archical order, together with ceremonies of the Eucharistic Sacrifice 
and all the Sacraments. 

Observe that in this triple power the Apostles were all equal 
among themselves and with S. Peter. Yet were they subordinate to 
him as their head and superior. This is why Peter (ver. 2) is placed 
and named first amongst them. 

And heal all manner of sickness, &c. Gr. vooov, i.e., disease . Both 

b n 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


4 


S. MATTHEW, X. 


this power, and that of casting out devils was given to the Apostles, 
after the manner of an abiding habit God did not endue them 
with a physical faculty of healing diseases ; but His omnipotent 
power was promised to them so as always to assist them, in such 
a way that as often as they willed to do these things, immedi- 
ately God cast out the devils, and bestowed healing. This power 
was given them for the confirmation of their preaching, that by this 
means they might convince the people. 

Now the names , &c. The reason why Christ chose exactly twelve 
Apostles, neither more nor less, was that they should correspond to 
the twdve Patriarchs, sons of Jacob. For as these were of the 
Jews, so were the Apostles the parents of all Christians. So SS. 
Jerome, Austin, and all the Fathers. Rabanus speaks of other 
mysteries in this number, and following him, S. Thomas (in Catena) 
says : This number twelve is made by multiplying three into four, 
and signifies that they should preach belief in the Trinity in the four 
quarters of the world. They were typified by the twelve sons of 
Jacob, by the twelve princes of the children of Israel, by the twelve 
wells of Elim, by the twelve stones of the breast-plate, the twelve 
loaves of the shew-bread, the twelve spies, the twelve stones taken 
out of Jordan, the twelve oxen that supported the brazen sea, the 
twelve stars in the crown of the bridegroom in the Apocalypse, the 
twelve foundations of the city, the twelve gates. 

The first , Simon , who is called Peter , &c. Beza, that he may get 
rid of the primacy of Peter and the Bishops of Rome who have suc- 
ceeded him, thinks that first is a spurious reading, and ought to be 
expunged. But it is the uniform reading of all the codices and ver- 
sions.— Greek, Latin, Syriac, and Hebrew. And it is incredible that 
the passage should have been corrupted by the later Greeks, who are 
schismatics, and deny the primacy of Peter. Rather would they 
have expunged the word first, if they could colourably have done so. 
In short, wherever the names of all the Apostles are given in Scrip, 
ture, Peter is placed first, Judas last ; whilst with respect to the rest 
the order varies, as is plain from Mark iiL 16, Luc. vi 14, 
Acts L 13. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



S. PETERS CHAIR AT ROME. 


5 


Moreover, Peter is called the first of the Apostles : not in age, for 
Andrew was older than he, as Epiphanius testifies (Hares 51); not 
in vocation, for Andrew was called before him (S. yohn i., 41); not 
in love, for Christ loved S. John above all the rest, and therefore he 
leaned upon His breast at His last Supper. It remains, therefore, 
that Peter was the first of the Apostles in excellence and authority, 
being, indeed, their head and ruler. Thus it is that the names of the 
rest are not given in any uniform order, nor one called second, 
another third, because all were equal, and all equally subject to 
Peter. From this word first, in Latin primus , comes the expression 
Primacy of Peter, which all the ancient Greeks and Latins acknow- 
ledged. Hear S. Chrysostom, u Peter was the first and, as it were, 
the head of all the Apostles.” S. Jerome (lib, I contra y<rvin, c. 17), 
t€ Among the twelve Apostles, one is chosen, that a head being 
appointed, occasion of schism may be taken away.” Ambrosiaster (in 
2 Cor. c. 12), Andrew followed the Saviour before Peter, and yet not 
Andrew, but Peter, received the Primacy. Peter, therefore, as the 
Primate of the Apostles, had power to admonish and correct them if 
they erred in faith or morals, to put an end to contentions, to assign 
them their provinces, to substitute others in their place if they fell, 
as he substituted Matthias in the room of the traitor, Judas. For 
this subordination of the Apostles, of bishops, and all the faithful 
under one head was necessary for the unity, stability; and good 
government of the Church, as S. Cyprian teaches — Hares 2. Peter 
alone among the Apostles had ordinary jurisdiction, to which in due 
order the Roman Pontiffs succeed. For Peter set up his Pontifi- 
cal Chair at Rome, where he died a martyr. But the Apostles had 
delegated jurisdiction from Christ, to which there were no successors. 

You will say, the bishops are said to be the successors of the 
Apostles. I reply, this is only said by way of analogy, because 
bishops share with the Apostles in episcopal order and jurisdiction, 
and because bishops are superior to other priests in the same way 
that the twelve Apostles were superior to the seventy-two disciples. 
But bishops do not possess that three-fold Apostolic pow er of which I 
spoke in the beginning of this chapter. The power of bishops only 


Digitized by'VrrOOQlC 


6 


S. MATTHEW, X. 


extends to their own dioceses, but that of the Apostles to all nations 
throughout the whole world, 

Andrew his brother. Mark places James and John before Andrew, 
making him the fourth. Luke does the same in Acts L, 13, but in 
his Gospel he places him before them as Matthew does. These vari- 
ations in the order of the names is to show that the Apostles are all 
equal in dignity and office. Whence Cajetan says upon this passage 
“ Peter alone has the distinction of being called firsts in order to 
intimate that it closely pertains to Christian knowledge to recognise 
the Primacy of Peter, and that it is of no consequence to know the 
order of the Apostles among themselves.” 

S. John in the Apocalypse, in describing the twelve Apostles as 
the twelve foundations of the heavenly Jerusalem, assigns to each his 
place with their own peculiar precious stones — The first foundation 
was jasper; the second, sapphire; the third, a chalcedony; the 
fourth, an emerald; the fifth, a sardonyx; the sixth, sardius ; the 
seventh, chrysolyte ; the eighth, beryl ; the ninth, a topaz ; the tenth, 
a chrysoprasus; the eleventh, a jacinth ; the twelfth, an amethyst 
(Rev. xxL, 19). 

The first, jasper, denotes Peter, on account of the firmness of his 
faith ; the second, a sapphire, Andrew, because of his heavenly life 
and love; the third, a chalcedony, or carbuncle, James, burning with 
zeal ; the fourth, an emerald, John, blooming and a virgin ; the fifth, 
a sardonyx, Philip, on account of the whiteness of his mind ; the 
sixth, the ruddy sardius, Bartholomew, flayed alive ; the seventh, a 
chrysolyte, the colour of the sea, Matthew, a penitent; the eighth, a 
polished beryl, Thomas, polished and established by Christ in the 
fhith of his Resurrection ; the ninth, a topaz, James the less, radiant 
with sanctity; the tenth, a chrysoprasus, Judas Thaddaeus, who, by 
his acute wisdom, was hostile to heretics, as it were an onion, for 
wpatrov means an onion ; the eleventh, a jacinth, Simon the Canaanite, 
on account of the sweetness of his manners ; the twelfth, the lowly 
Matthias, and the least 

Paul and Barnabas are not reckoned among these twelve Apostles, 
because they were called by Christ to the Apostolate, not whilst He 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



MEANING or tttE apostles' names. 


1 


was upon earth, but when He was reigning in heaven. They had 
equal power, and an equal measure of the Spirit, with the twelve 
Apostles. 

Andrew is a Greek word, and means manly, strong, heroic. Many 
of the Jews, after they became subject to Alexander’s successors, 
learnt Greek, and took Greek names. Andrew was, what his name 
signifies — brave and heroic in his preaching and passion, from the 
strength of his love to Christ, panting for his cross. He was, says 
Gaudentius, the first of all the disciples of John the Baptist, and 
being by him sent to Christ, first began to know Him. 

James, the son of Zebedce: he was sumamed the Greater : He was 
the patron and Aposde of Spain, and was the first of the Aposdes 
who suffered martyrdom, being beheaded by Herod Agrippa. 

John, his brother. This is the beloved disciple of Christ, of 
whom I have spoken at length in the prefaces to his Gospel, 
Episdes, and Apocalypse. 

Philip is Greek; ^/Xoc furor, a lover of horses , meaning a knight, 
warlike. For Philip was as a war-horse of Christ against the Jews 
and infidels. Concerning this, see the Apoc. (vL 2), “ and behold a 
white horse, and he that sat upon him had a bow, and a crown 
was given unto him, and he went forth conquering and to con- 
quer." 

Bartholomew has been explained to mean the son of him who 
suspendeth the waters, from bar, a son, thala, he suspended, marim, 
waters. Whence Ruperti and Osorius think that Christ turned 
water into wine upon the occasion of Bartholomew's wedding at 
Cana of Galilee, as though he had been the bridegroom. Others 
reject this. For Bartholomew is the same as son of Tolmai. 
Tolmai was a common name among the Hebrews, as is plain from 
Josh. xv. 14, and 2 Sam. ill 3. Less apdy, some interpret Bartho- 
lomew as son of Ptolemy, as though he had been sprung from the 
Ptolemies, kings of Egypt 

Thomas, in Gr. Didymus, a twin. Concerning him, see on Jo. 
xx. 24. 

Matthew, the publican. Note S. Matthew's humility, who when 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


1 


& 4. MATTHEW, X. 

the other Evangelists were silent about his being a publican, publicly 
announced himself a sinner. 

James , the son of Alphceus: Alphaeus means in Hebrew, learned \ 
or a doctor . This Alphaeus, the father of James, was a different 
person from Alphaeus, the father of Matthew (Mark ii. 14). For 
this Alphaeus, the father of James, was the husband of Mary of 
Cleopas, who is called the sister of Mary, the mother of die Lord 
(Jo. xix. 25). Whence Helecas, Bishop of Saragossa, and others, 
think Alphaeus is the same as Cleopas. Alphaeus begat James and 
Jude of Mary. This was James the Less, of whom I speak at 
length in the Preface to his Epistle. 

Thaddaus : this is the same as Jude, the author of a canonical 
Epistle. Of him also I have spoken in the Preface to his Epistle. 

Simon the Canaanite. This Simon is not so called because he 
was sprung from the Canaanites, as some wrongly imagine, for all 
the Apostles were Jews, but because he was born at Cana of Galilee. 
Hence Nicephorus (lib. 8, c. 30) and Baronius think that he was the 
bridegroom at the marriage feast when Christ turned the water into 
wine. Because Cana in Heb. means zeal, S. Jerome says he was 
called the Canaanite, ue Zealotes , the Zealot, with a double allusion 
to the city of Cana and his zeaL 

And Judas Iscariot: as though Ish keriot: i.e., a man of Carioth, 
a city of the tribe of Judah. (See Josh. rv. 25.) So Angelus 
Caninius on Hebrew names (cap. 13.) Others, with greater proba- 
bility, are of opinion that he was so called because he came from 
the village of Iscarioth, in the tribe of Ephraim, not far from 
Samaria. So S. Jerome in this place, and on Is. xxviii. 1, Maldo- 
natus and Adrichomius. Iscariot means in Hebrew the same as 
mercenary, for sachar is merchandise. And this well agrees with 
Judas, who made merchandise of Christ Christ chose Judas, 
although He knew that he would prove a traitor, because He was 
willing to bear his treachery, and to add it to the weight of His 
Passion, for He wished His Passion to be in all respects complete. 
He willed to suffer every kind of torment, and from all sorts of 
men, to teach us to do good, not only to the good and thankful, 


Digitized by 


Google 


SIX or THE APOSTLES BRETHREN. 


9 


but also to the evil and the unthankful. Hear S. Ambrose (lib. 5 in 
Luc.) : “ Judas is chosen, not through imprudence, but through 
providence, since Christ willed to be betrayed by him, in order that 
thou, if thou art forsaken by thy friend, or even if betrayed by thy 
friend, mayest bear patiently the error of thy judgment, the loss of 
thy kindness.” (See S. Jerome on Is. xxviii. 1.) “ Woe to the crown 
of pride, the drunkards of Ephraim, and the fading flower, the glory 
of his exaltation ” (Vulg.), which the Sept translates, “ Woe to the 
crown of wrong, the mercenaries of Ephraim, a flower falling from 
glory upon the top of the fat mountain.” S. Jerome understands 
this mystically of Judas, the traitor ; “who was,” he says, “of the 
tribe of Ephraim, of one of its villages, Iscarioth. He indeed sold 
the Lord for a price. He indeed, as a flower, fell from the glory ot 
his Apostleship upon that most fat mountain of which we suppose 
it is spoken, * Jacob hath eaten and drunk, and is filled ; and the 
beloved hath grown fat and kicked : 9 or, according to the Heb., 
upon ‘the valley of the fat ones, 1 *.&, Gethsemane, by which also )6 
signified the name of the place in which Judas betrayed the Lord.” 
After a little, he adds, “The traitor was drunken, not with wine, but 
with avarice, and the incurable madness of asps, even the food of the 
devil ; who, after the morsel, entered into him and wholly devoured 
him, because ‘his prayer was turned into sin/ and not, even in 
repentance, had he the fruit of salvation.” 

Note, first, Christ combines together all his Apostles, and assigns 
to each his companion, making six pairs. With Peter He joins 
Andrew, and so on ; that each may derive help and confirmation 
from his companion in his preaching. And for this cause He sent 
them out two and two (Luc. x. 1.) 

Again, among His Apostles, Christ chose three pairs of brethren, 
viz., Peter and Andrew, James and John, James the Less and Jude ; 
some add Simon the Canaanite who, they say, was a brother of 
James and Jude. He did this to teach how dear to Him is brotherly 
love, according to that saying in Eccles. (xxv. 1) : “In these things 
hath my spirit delight, which are approved before God and man, the 
concord of brethren, the love of neighbours, and a husband and 




IO 


S. MATTHEW, X. 


wife agreeing together.” Also Prov. xviii 19, 44 a brother who is 
helped by a brother is as a strong city.” 

Observe, secondly, several of the Apostles were relations of Christ, 
as James and John, James the Less and Jude. For Christ chose 
His Apostles, not to be sleek and wealthy princes, but to endure 
labours, poverty, crosses, torments, and martyrdom. Whence He 
gave them abundance of good things — not temporal but spiritual — 
even as the order of charity requires, according to which it is right 
to wish and care for greater grace for parents and relations than 
for others. 

I may add, it behoved the Word, when He took our flesh, to unite 
those who were most near to Him in the flesh more closely to His 
Divinity also, by grace. And this He did, so that His mother was the 
holiest of all, then S. Joseph, after him Joachim and Anna, as His 
grandparents : also John the Baptist and his mother, James and 
John, James the Less, and Jude, as His relations and kinsfolk. For 
these, because by fleshly relationship they were nearer Christ’s 
humanity, so also were they brought into chosen connection with His 
Divinity through grace. Therefore this was not in Christ the fault of 
accepting persons, as it is in Prelates, who, contrary to what is right, 
burden rather than truly honour their nephews and kinsmen with 
dignities, prebends and riches. 

Lastly, there were three chief Apostles, viz., Peter, James and 
John, whom Christ took as the witnesses of His transfiguration, His 
Passion in the Garden, and other secrets, whence these are, as it 
were, the pillars of the Church, and the Triumvirs of the Apostles. 

Go not into the way of the Gentiles . Syriac has, of the profane : Way 
of the G. is a Hebraism for, to the Gentiles . Similar is Jer. ii, r8. 
44 And now what hast thou to do in the way of Egypt ?” That is, 
44 Why art thou going into Egypt ? ” 

This is the first precept of Christ, by which sending His Apostles 
forth to preach, He bids them go not to the Gentiles or the Samari- 
tans, but to the Jews. The reason was, because they were the 
children of the Kingdom, and sons of Abraham, Isaac and Jacoby 
to whom the Messiah, that is Christ, had been promised by God. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



Christ’s chief command to his apostles. 


ii 


Had not Christ acted thus, the Jews might have taken exception 
against him and the Apostles, and said, “ Thou art not the true 
Messiah, for thou preachest the Gospel to the Gentiles and Samari- 
tans. Our Messiah was promised by the Prophets to the Jews, not 
to the Gentiles.” This precept, however, was only temporary. It 
only lasted during the life of Christ on earth. After His Resurrection 
Christ sent His Apostles to evangelize the nations throughout the 
whole world. Then was taken away the distinction between Jews 
and Gentiles, and of both there was made one Fold and one Shep- 
herd. So S. Jer., Chrys., and others. S. Paul puts the command of 
Christ in this verse in another form, when he says, “ For I say that 
Christ Jesus was the Minister of the circumcision for the truth of 
God to confirm the promises made unto the fathers.” 

And as ye go, preach, saying, &c. This is the second and the chief 
command of Christ to His Apostles, viz., that they should traverse 
Judea, and preach the Kingdom of Heaven, and invite, yea compel men 
to come into it It was as though Christ said, In a short time I will, 
by My death, open Heaven to men, which has been shut for so many 
thousands of years by Adam’s sin, and I will open the way of entrance 
into it Invite all therefore to enter upon this way that they may 
gain the Kingdom. This was the sum and substance of Christ’s 
preaching. 

Heal the sick, &c. This is the third precept of Christ, by which 
He bids them use freely the power which had been given them of 
working miracles to persuade men to believe in Christ, that their souls 
might be healed of unbelief. 

Freely ye have received, &c. For Jreely the Greek has, tupeav, as 
a gratis in the Vulgate. This is Christ’s fourth precept By 
using the word gratis, he takes away the occasion of pride, says S. 
Chrys., since they know that they have not this power of themselves ; 
but by God’s free gift have received it, without merit of their own. 
In like manner this word gratis excludes all avarice and simony, 
that they may not sell their miracles for money. Again, they are 
admonished to be liberal in exercising this power, keeping as the end 
in view the benefit of others, like fountains, which the more water 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



19 


S. MATTHEW, X. 


they send forth abroad, the more they interiorly receive. This is what 
Isaiah foretold concerning Christ “ Ho ! every one that thirsteth, 
come ye to the waters. Come ye, buy wine and milk without money 
and without price.** For this liberality became the King of kings, 
that is Christ the Lord, and therefore He willed His Apostles to be 
altogether opposed to everyappearance, yea, even shadow, of simony 
and covetousness, that they should not receive any gift, lest men 
should think they were seeking their own wealth, and so be turned 
away from the faith of Christ The Apostles would have sinned and 
broken the command of Christ if they had received gifts on account 
of their preaching. Thus S. Hilarion, as S. Jerome testifies in his 
life, healed very many sick persons, but would not receive any gifts 
from them, not so much as a morsel of bread ; for he was wont to 
say, “ Gratis ye have received, gratis give.'* He replied to a certain 
nobleman whose name was Orion, whom he had delivered from a 
legion of devils, and who urgently pressed him to receive a gift, at 
least that he might distribute it among the poor, “ Be not grieved, 
my son, at what I do, for 1 do it for thy sake and my sake. If I 
should receive this I should offend God, and the legion would return 
to thee.** 

A provincial council of Constantinople in a Synodical Epistle 
expounds, Gratis ye have received \ &c., of the priesthood, that it 
must not be simoniacally sold. 

Observe, the precise reason why the Apostles were bound to 
bestow gratis the Charismata given to them by God was not merely 
because they had received them gratis from God. For he who has 
received knowledge, or some natural skill infused into him by God, 
like Bezaleel, the architect of the Tabernacle, — such an one, I say, 
may lawfully sell it, and teach it to others for money, as some 
masters of arts do. The precise reason, therefore, is because this 
thing is so sublime, and of such a nature that it cannot be acquired 
by human industry, but can only be received by the free grace of 
God ; because it is indeed divine, and therefore far surpassing and 
transcending all price. This is the meaning of gratis ye have received. 
Wherefore to wish to estimate it at a price, and to sell it, is to treat it 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



SPIRITUAL THINGS MUST NOT BE SOLD. 1 3 

unworthily and profane it. It is to do a grievous indignity to it and 
to God, from Whom it has its sanctity : and therefore it is the crime 
of simony and sacrilege. 

You will say. Then by parity of reasoning, he who exchanges one 
sacred thing for another is guilty of simony by the law of nature, 
and by the Divine law, because he does not give it gratis. Adrian 
admits this {guodlib . 9 ad 4, conclus. lit £.). But I reply by deny- 
ing the consequence. For in this place, to give gratis is to give 
without temporal hire or reward. This may be collected from what 
follows : Provide (Gr. Possess) neither gold \ &c. For things sacred 
have no temporal price. And this is neither given nor received 
when one sacred thing is exchanged for another. So SS. Jer., 
Chrys., and others. (See Lessius, Tract de Simonia, dub. 3.) Let 
religious and apostolic men follow closely this precept of Christ, 
for it very greatly conduces to His glory and the salvation of souls, 
as I have learned by an experience of forty years. S. Ignatius, the 
Founder of our Society (Reg. 17, Sum. Constit) thus wisely lays 
down : “ Let all who are under obedience to this Society remember 
that they ought to give gratis what they have gratis received, 
neither asking nor receiving pay, nor any alms, by which masses, 
or confessions, or sermons, or any other offices whatsoever of the 
things which the Society, according to our institution, is able to 
exercise, may seem to be compensated ; that thus it may be able 
to advance with greater freedom both in the Divine service and 
the edification of our neighbours.” 

Once, when S. Antony was on a journey, he saw an immense 
piece of gold. He admired the size of the glittering piece of 
metal, and ran as fast as he could to his mountain, as though he 
were running from a fire. Whenever money was offered to S. Vin- 
cent Ferrar as he was preaching through the villages, he refused 
it, and forbade his companions accepting it S. Francis was wont 
to say that u money to the servants of God is nothing else than a 
devil, and a poisonous snake.” 

Provide neither gold \ &c., in your purses , Gr. in your girdles ; for 
formerly they attached purses to their girdles, or wove them into 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



M 


8. MATTHEW, X. 


their girdles. This was especially the case with soldiers and 
travellers. Whence the proverb, “ He has lost his girdle,” said of 
him who has no money. Hence also coffers have been called 
girdles. 

This is the fifth precept of Christ given to His Apostles concern- 
ing not possessing money. It was given for three reasons, i. 
That being free from all earthly affections and cares, they should 
depend entirely upon God's providence. 2. That they should be 
wholly intent upon preaching the Gospel, and give all their thoughts 
and cares to that. 3. That they might give to all nations an illus- 
trious example of simplicity, poverty, contempt of riches, whereby — 
by means of this angelical life — they might draw all men to love 
and admire them. There is nothing, says Euthymius, which makes 
men so admirable as a frugal life, and to be contented with whatever 
comes to hand. 

Symbolically , S. Jerome says, "gold, we often read, is to be taken 
for understanding, silver for speech, brass for voice. These cannot 
be received by us from others, but are given to us as a possession by 
the Lord.” 

You will inquire whether those precepts of Christ concerning not 
possessing money, shoes, staff, and two tunics, or coats, were given 
to the Apostles in perpetuity, or were only temporary? S. Hilary, 
S. Jerome, S. Ambrose, S. Austin, and after them Maldonatus, are of 
opinion that they were perpetual ; so that the Apostles in all their 
travels, in which they preached to the Gentiles, were tied to this 
form and species of poverty. The common opinion is that these 
precepts were* only temporarily binding, that is to say, only whilst 
they were preaching to the Jews during Christ's earthly life. 

First, I say that this latter opinion is the correct one. It is plainly 
so from Christ's saying, Go ye not into the way of the Gentiles , &c. 
For the Messiah must be first shown to the Jews, that if they received 
Him, the Gentiles might the more readily accept Him. 

2. It is plain from Luc. xxii. 35, where Christ, speaking retrospec- 
tively of this mission and precept, says, When I sent you without bag 
and scrip and shoes , lacked ye anything t And they said, Nothing. He 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


HOW THE APOSTLES WERE PROVIDED FOR. 1 5 

saith unto them, But now. &c. This word now shows that he was 
giving them a different precept, viz., that they should take a scrip, 
and buy a sword. 

3. The Apostles in going to the Gentiles were preaching to infidels 
who were likely at first to be prejudiced against them as enemies of 
their gods, and who would not deign to give them food and hospitality. 
Before, therefore, they could persuade them to believe, they must 
provide themselves with the means of living, especially as they were 
often accompanied by a large number of catechists, interpreters, and 
other coadjutors. Thus, when Paul was going to Jerusalem, there 
accompanied him Sopater, Aristarchus, Secundus, Timotheus, Caius, 
Tychicus and Trophimus (See Acts, xx. 4). 

The Apostles were accustomed to allow a pious and wealthy 
woman to accompany them, to provide for them. This clearly 
appears from 1. Cor., ix. 5 : “ Have we not power to carry about a 
yroman, a sister (Vulg.), even as the other Apostles?” Christ Him- 
self did the same thing, who permitted Magdalen, and other pious 
women whom he had converted, to accompany Him to provide for 
Himself and His followers (see Luc. viii. 3). Yea, Judas had coffers 
(Vulg), and bore what was put into them. And in the 6th of John, 
the disciples say to Christ : “ Whence shall we buy bread that these 
may cat?” 

You may say that Christ did not Himself keep the precept which 
He gave to His Apostles concerning not carrying money. I answer 
that Christ did observe it at the commencement of His ministry. He 
was then without any coffers, as appears from His words, “ Foxes 
have holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of Man 
hath not where to lay His head.” It was with the object of provid- 
ing for His twelve Apostles and seventy Disciples, whom He took 
about with Him, that He permitted Judas to carry coffers (Vulg.). For 
who could exercise hospitality towards so great a number of people ? 
Who could, or would, sustain them for a continuance? But Christ 
sent His Apostles throughout Judea only in pairs. And two people 
could easily find hospitality from anyone piously disposed. In like 
manner when S. Francis Xavier was going to the Indies, he took no 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



r« 


a MATTHEW, X. 


provision for his journey into the ship. Indeed, he refused what was 
offered him by the King of Portugal He daily begged his bread 
from the sailors and passengers, because he was alone. But now, at 
the present time, when fifties and hundreds from the Society of Jesus 
and other Orders are often sent out to preach the Gospel in the 
Indies, it is only right that they should carry some provision with 
them for their voyage. For where are the sailors or passengers who 
could or would supply all these persons during a six months 1 voyage? 
So S. Vincent Ferrer, who went through the countries of Europe in 
an apostolic manner evangelizing, was wont to have hundreds, yea 
thousands of people accompanying him. And so he had his pur- 
veyors, who provided food and other necessaries for all ; for die 
ordinary inhabitants could not have borne the burden. 

I say, however, in the second place, that these precepts, so far as 
their substance and scope are concerned, which were to exhibit a 
mind free from coveto ..ness, and to place before it a great contempt 
of all earthly things, and a firm trust in the providence of God ; 
these are the things, I say, which Christ wished to impress upon 
His Apostles by these precepts. And these the Apostles in very 
deed fulfilled, when, having received the Holy Ghost at Pentecost, 
they thought, spoke, and treated of nothing except heavenly things. 
And so these precepts of Christ, not merely as to their scope, but as 
to their very letter, whenever and wherever it was possible to do so, 
were fulfilled by them. Yea, to these precepts Paul added die 
deter minat ion that he would not receive from the faithful the expense 
of his maintenance, but would procure a livelihood by the labour of 
his hands. And this is all that is meant by the Fathers who were 
cited at the commencement of this discussion. S. Francis imitated 
this example of Apostolic poverty when he sent out his brethren two 
by two to preach, and gave them this as their only viaticum, “ Cast 
thy care upon the Lord, and He will nourish thee." 

Nor scrip, &c. The scrip is a pouch, or traveller's bag, in which 
wayfarers put bread and food to eat on the way, hence the adage, 
“ The beggar’s bag is not fulL” 

Neither two coats : understand two pairs of coats, or tunics, says 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



PICTURE or JESUS BY S. LUKE. 


17 


S. Thomas, for a change, that you may put on, now one, now the 
other. For Christ does not here forbid the putting on of two gar- 
ments at the same time on account of cold or other necessity, for 
Christ Himself was clothed with two garments, as appears from 
John xix. 23. So S. Jerome, &c. 

More simply, Lyra, Toletus and Barradi understand a single tunic 
to be here meant For one coat in so hot a country as Judea is 
sufficient Wherefore Christ had only one outer coat, for that seam- 
less garment was an inner one, or a shirt Over the outer garment 
it was afterwards the custom to throw a pallium, or doke. 

Neither shoes: not two pair of shoes, say S. Thomas and Cajetan : 
but the more simple way of taking it is to understand that such shoes 
as cover the whole foot are forbidden, not sandals, which only protect 
the soles of the feet from being hurt by stones. S. Mark (vL 9) 
shows that these were allowed to the Apostles. For Palestine is a 
rough and stony country as well as a hot one. So S. Jer., Enthym., 
Tolet, Jansen, andS. Austin understand the passage. But shoes confine 
and, as it were, imprison the feet, and make them less expeditious in 
travelling, and sometimes too hot. Christ then forbade shoes to His 
Apostles, as they were travelling about Palestine, that they might 
make greater expedition in their journeys, and to take away undue 
care of their feet Shoes are called by the Greeks hTrotypara, i.e., 
what is bound, or tied, because they were formerly bound or tied with 
strings above, as is still the custom with many. That the Apostles 
after Christ’s Ascension made use of sandals, appears from Acts xii., 
where the Angel says to Peter, Bind on thy sandals . Of such a kind 
is S. Andrew’s sandal in the Cathedral of Treves, which has been 
shown me by the Reverend, the Provost Such were the sandals 
worn by the prophets Isaiah, Jeremiah and Ezekiel, as appears from 
their ancient pictures preserved at Rome in the Codex of the Emperor 
Basil Porphyrogenitus, in the Vatican. Such too may be seen in the 
picture of the Blessed Virgin, painted by S. Luke, and preserved at 
Rome. The Child Jesus is there represented in her arms. He 
is shod with sandals which are bound about the feet above, 
with strings, in such a way that the toes and upper portion of the 
VOL. II. C 


Digitized by 


Google 



i8 


S. MATTHEW, X. 


feet are entirely uncovered. Nothing is covered except the sole 
of the foot 

Many of the early Christians followed this example of Christ and 
His Apostles, and went without shoes. Lucian shows this in his 
Philopalor % where describing a Christian’s dress, he says, u He wears 
a ragged cloke, without hat or shoes, with unkempt hair.” Similarly 
Plato, says S. Jerome, “ bade that the two extremities of the body, the 
head and the feet should be left uncovered, that they may not become 
tender. For when these are strong, the other parts of the body will 
be robust” On the cloke of the Christians there was the old proverb, 
Gone from the toga to the pallium , meaning that a man had gone over 
from heathenism to Christianity. For heathens wore the toga, 
Christians the pallium, or cloke. Whence Tertullian (lib. de Pallia 
c. 5), “we say nothing about shoes, about the peculiar torment of the 
toga, the most unclean protection of the feet, albeit false enough. 
For how is it not expedient that the barefooted man should be stift 
with cold and heat, like the crook-footed man in shoes ! Vast assist- 
ance is there in walking from the cobbler’s stall ! The inventors had 
an eye to the votaries of Venus 1 ” Very excellently says Clement 
of Alexandria (lib. 2. Pcedagog. cap . n), “Most becoming is it in a 
man not to have any shoes, unless he be a soldier. For a man that 
is shod has no small resemblance to one who is fettered. It is the 
best kind of exercise, and conduces to health and expedition to go 
with naked feet, unless necessity prevent : but if we are not going 
on a journey, and are unable to walk with bare feet, we must use the 
sort of shoes which the Athenians call KoWxo$ac, because, as I con- 
jecture, the feet are near the ground. John is a sufficient witness 
of the advantage of being lightly and simply shod. He said that he 
was not worthy to unloose the latchet of the Lord's sandals. He had 
no finely worked shoes, who exhibited to the Hebrews the pattern ol 
true philosophy.” 

Symbolically , S. Austin (lib. 2. de Consens. Evangd. c. 30.), says, 
“ Mark saith they were to be shod with sandals, by which the foot is 
neither covered above, nor yet bare on the ground. For verily it 
was the Lord’s will that the Gospel should neither be hid, nor yet 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



WHAT KIND OF STAFF ALLOWED BY CHRIST. 


IV 


that it should rely upon earthly advantages.” The Gloss., “ By an 
Apostle must be cast away gold, that is, worldly wisdom ; silver, that 
is, eloquence ; money in the purse, that is, hidden wisdom ; a scrip, 
that is the burden of the world ; shoes, that is, the examples of dead 
works.” 

Nor yet staves \ The Gr., followed by the Vulg., has staff in the 
singular. You will say, Mark (vi. 9), says differently, viz., a staff otily . 

I reply, Mark is speaking of the Heb. mischan, a rod, or a staff, on 
which to lean. For this was the symbol of poor travellers, who 
relieve their weariness by leaning on a staff. This was how Jacob 
journeyed to Mesopotamia. But Matthew is here speaking of matte, 
i,e. 9 a rod for defence, or punishment This was what Christ forbade 
His Apostles carrying. Observe that the Greek p&fitioc, a rod, 
has three meanings. First The symbol of honour and power, such 
as the sceptre of monarchs, the fasces of consuls, the rod of praetors 
and judges. This is called in Hebrew, scebet, whence sceptre. As 
David says in Ps. ii., “ Thou shalt rule them with a rod ( scebet ) of 
iron.” And Ps. xlv., “The sceptre of Thy kingdom is a right 
sceptre.” And Is. xiv. 5, “The Lord hath broken the staff of the 
wicked, and the sceptre of the rulers.” Hence also: patoftyoi, that 
is, rod-bearers, was the name given to lictors and officers, by whom 
the magistrates executed their sentences. The rod which they bore 
was the sign of their office. So also the Jewish Doctors were wont 
to carry a rod, or wand in their hands, says Lyra, as the mark of 
their teaching, in the same way that schoolmasters now make use of 
a ferula. Christ forbids this practice to His Apostles. He bids 
them carry before them modesty, humility ; not imperious authority 
and power. It was such a rod as that of which I have been speak- 
ing that Moses, the lawgiver of the stiff-necked Israelites, bore, and 
with which he smote Pharaoh with the ten plagues, and chastised the 
rebellious Jews. Christ, whose law is the spirit of love and sweetness, 
hath another rod. 

Second. 'P£/Moc, rod, or staff, hath the same meaning as matte, in the 
sense of a rod with which you strike or beat a person, as teachers 
scourge their scholars. Thus Ps. ixxxix., “I will visit their 

c 2 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


20 


S. MATTHEW, X. 


iniquities with a rod.” And Exod. xxi. 20, " He who smiteth his 
manservant, or his maidservant with a rod.” So the arms of rustics 
are sticks and rods. David went against Goliath with no other 
arms than his staff and his sling. And Ezek. (c. xxxix.), speaking 
of the slaughter of Gog, says “ They shall bum the arms, the shield, 
and the spear, the bows and arrows, the staves and the javelins.” 
Also Is. xx., “ Asshur, the rod of mine anger.” So that in this place 
by staff, arms of any kind are forbidden by Christ to His Apostles. 
He bids them trust not in arms but in God, and that they should be 
preachers of Divine protection, and propagate the faith, not ty fight- 
ing, but by suffering. “ For he who has the Lord for his help, what 
need hath he of a staff ? 99 says S. Jerome. 

Third. *P signifies mischan, a staff on which to lean. This 
Christ allowed to His Apostles. 

Lastly. Johannes Alba {lib. elect p. 337), by staff here understands 
one on which was cut some mark or sign of mutual friendship, so 
that it was what was called a tessera , , or pledge of friendship, which 
people were accustomed to show when they went to personally 
unknown friends, that they might be received to hospitality by them. 
Wherefore when men renounced friendship, they were said to break 
the tessera of friendship. So that Christ’s meaning in this place 
would be, “Rely not upon human help, bear not the tessera of 
friendship as the guarantee for your reception. God will provide you 
with hospitality.” But this sense is a strained one. 

Symbolically , the staff or rod denotes the power of the Apostles. 
S. Austin. 

The workman is worthy , &c. He gives the reason why He forbids 
the carrying a viaticum. “ Let preachers,” says S. Chrys., “ receive 
their support from the people, but their reward or their hire from God.” 
In other places this support is called wages } or hire, from the simili- 
tude of those workmen, to whom food is given as a part of their 
wages. Yet in the case of preachers it is not properly wages, for 
preaching far transcends all price, and all human wages. S. Paul (in 
1 Cor. ix.) calls this support of preachers, their pay or stipend \ from 
the similitude of soldiers, to whom it is not given as wages ; for what 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



APOSTOLIC SALUTATION. 


21 


is it in comparison with the perils they undergo? but as the support 
which is their due. “ Labour therefore in the Lord’s vineyard, O ye 
Apostles, and preach zealously. Be not anxious about sustenance, 
about food and raiment, for God will abundantly provide for you 
either by your hosts, or from some other of the rich treasures of 
His Providence.” 

Into whatsoever city \ &c. Worthy , that is, apt and meet to receive 
the Gospel, one who fears God, and leads a good life, who desires 
salvation, who shows hospitality to poor and pious people, especially 
preachers; one who knows, as S. Jerome says, “ that he is receiving 
a favour, rather than conferring one.” 

This is the sixth precept which Christ gives to His Apostles con- 
cerning hospitality, when they were going to preach to the Jews, 
that they should not lodge with any one who was opposed to faith 
in Christ, or of evil report, lest his infamy should bring discredit 
upon themselves. "A host,” says S. Jerome, “should be chosen 
for his reputation among the people, and from his character with his 
neighbours ; lest the worthiness of preaching should be besmirched 
by the infamy of the preacher’s host” 

And the rah eide, &c. Why? First, lest if the Apostles should 
go about from one host to another, they should appear changeable 
and inconstant. So S. Chrys. Secondly, not to grieve their first 
host, and do him a dishonour by migrating to one worthier. Thirdly, 
lest any one should call them gluttonous, seekers after the luxurious 
boards of the rich. It must be understood that this precept applies 
only when they did not remain very long in the same place, so as to 
become burdensome to their host ; for in such a case charity and 
prudence would recommend a change of hostel. 

When ye enter into a house } &c. This was the ancient method of 
salutation among the Hebrews, by which they prayed for the peace 
and prosperity of the master of the house and his family. The 
Hebrews understood it of temporal blessings, but Christ of spiritual. 
For Christ came to the world to make peace between God, man, 
and angels. Wherefore when He was born the angels sang, “ Peace 
on earth, to men of goodwill” (Vulg.). 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



12 


S. MATTHEW, X. 


This is the seventh precept — that they should pray for peace foi 
their host, and by their prayer discover if he were worthy and suit- 
able. The Apostles, therefore, pray for peace for their host, first 
with God, secondly with his family and neighbours and all other 
persons. S. Chrys. says that this salutation of the Apostles was not 
a mere naked and verbal one, but real and efficacious, and had the 
power of conferring upon their host (if he were worthy) actual peace 
— that is to say, grace, faith, and salvation. 

And if the house be worthy , &c. That is, if — as He had said a little 
before — the host be worthy, that is, a lover of peace and salvation. 

But if it be not worthy, &c. If the host refuse and reject your 
salutation of peace, your peace shall return unto you — Gr. &ri<rrpafjfrv, 
let it return, in the sense of shall return. For the Heb. often uses 
the imperative instead of the future. Note the personification. 
Peace is here introduced as a person rejected by a host, and going 
elsewhere, and carrying the Apostles with him. If the host rejects 
your salutation of peace, your salutation shall not therefore be un- 
fruitful, for there shall come to yourselves what you prayed for him, 
that is, peace and all prosperity. Thus shall your peace, repulsed 
by this unworthy host, come back to you, and lead you to some 
worthy host who will eagerly receive you and believe your preaching. 
There is a similar mode of expression in Ps. xxxv. 12, 13, to which 
Christ here makes an allusion : “ They rewarded me evil for good,” 
&c. ; u And my prayer shall return into mine own bosom.” So 
Eusebius, S. Athanasius, and Hesychius on this Psalm expound it 
The latter says, “ Into the bosom of Christ, i.e., the Church of the 
Gentiles, the prayer of Christ (turned away by the Jews) falleth.” 
This is what S. Paul said to the Jews : “ It behoved that the Word 
of God should be spoken first unto you, but since ye reject it, and 
count yourselves unworthy of eternal life, lo, we turn to the 
Gentiles.” 

And whosoever shall not receive you, &c. ... the dust of your feet. 
Luke and Mark add, for a testimony against them. AbuL says that 
the Apostles were to do this twice, once in the city and once out- 
side the city. They were to do it by striking their sandals against 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


SIN OF REJECTING THE APOSTLES. 23 

the ground, or by knocking, or rubbing them upon a stone, to 
brush off the dust. 

You will ask, Why was this? i. S. Jerome says, dust is shaken 
off as a testimony of labour, to show that they had entered the 
city, and the Apostolic preaching had reached it. And as Theophy- 
lact : “ They testify that for their sakes they had made so long a 
journey, and it had profited them nothing.” 

2. Shake off the dust , as impious, on account of the impious 
inhabitants, that ye may signify that they are, as it were, anathema, 
and that ye will have nothing, not even their dust in common 
with them, as being doomed to eternal condemnation. So S. Jer. 
rheophyl., Ambrose, &c. 

3. That this dust shaken off may be a witness in the day ol 
judgment against their unbelief and wickedness. And this is why 
Luke 2idds,for a testimony to them , i.e., against them . 

By this, which is the 8th precept of Christ, He tacitly bids His 
Apostles be of good courage, and not to be distressed, when they 
saw the Jews rejecting the Gospel, but as God’s avengers to rise 
up boldly against them. 

Verily Isay unto you, &c. They shall be more heavily punished 
and condemned who reject the Apostles than the Sodomites were, 
who perished in the fearful fire from heaven, by which the whole 
Pentapolis was consumed, for an awful example to all ages. 

You will ask, how can this be true, since the sin of Sodom was 
a very great crime contrary to nature, and crying to heaven ? The 
sin of Sodom is reckoned amongst the worst sins, but in the 
catalogue of lusts, or sins against the natural law of chastity only, 
for, in other respects, it is certain that there are worse sins, such as 
heresy, infidelity, blasphemy, sacrilege, despair, hatred of God. Those 
therefore who rejected the Apostles, and in so doing rejected the 
grace and salvation of Christ, sinned far worse than the Sodomites, 
and that, not by a single, but by a manifold sin, viz., i. by the sin 
of infidelity, 2. of disobedience, 3. of ingratitude, 4. of inhospitality, 
5. of rebellion and contumacy against God, contrary to the law of 
nature, and of God, and against His grace so benevolently and 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



24 S. MATTHEW, X. 

liberally offered to them, and confirmed by so many miracles and 
benefits. 

This denunciation has also in a measure an application to those 
who despise God’s word, or vocation, or holy inspirations, against 
whom God thunders, in Prov. i. 24. “ Because I called, and ye 

refused, I also will mock at your calamity/’ 

S. Jerome proves from this passage that the punishments of the 
damned are not all equal, nor, by consequence, their faults. 

Moreover Christ appositely compares those who rejected Ac 
Apostles to the Sodomites. 1. Because they were guilty of 
inhumanity and barbarity towards guests. 2. Because as the 
Sodomites were admonished by Lot and despised him, so were these 
admonished by Apostles whom Christ sent forth for their salvation. 
3. As the Sodomites were punished by fire and brimstone from 
heaven, so will these be punished by fire and brimstone in hell, only 
far more severely ; because if the Sodomites had heard the preaching 
of Christ and His Apostles, and had seen their miracles, they would 
have believed and repented. 

Behold / send you forth as sheep, &c. & Jerome, by wolves, 

understands the Scribes and Pharisees : others, any enemies, or 
persecutors. No animal is so defenceless as a sheep. In this way 
Christ sends his Apostles without arms, that he may shew forth 
His own power in them. He does not send them as lions, but as 
sheep, that by means of His miraculous power they may vanquish 
the wolves. Listen to S. Chrys., “Let them blush, who, like wolves, 
persecute their adversaries, when they behold innumerable wolve? 
overcome by a very few sheep. And assuredly, so long as we are 
sheep, we shall easily overcome our enemies. But when we are 
changed into the nature of wolves, then we are overcome, for in 
such a case we have no more help from our shepherd, who feeds 
sheep not wolves.” S. Chrys. observes that Christ foretells coming 
evils and persecutions to His Apostles for four reasons. 1. That 
they may learn His foreknowledge. 2. That they may not suppose 
such things happen through lack of power in their master. 3. 
That they may not be suddenly overcome. 4. That they may not 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


APOSTLES VANQUISH BY MEEKNESS. 


*5 


be troubled at the time of the Cross. Christ thus, as it were, 
animates His Apostles, “ Come, O ye my Apostles, I am sending 
you to the Jews and to Infidels, who will vex you and persecute 
you, but think of this, that it is / who send you, /, I say, who sent 
Elijah and Elisha, Isaiah and the rest of the prophets to Ahab, 
Jezebel and Manasseh, and other wicked kings. I animated, 
strengthened, and protected them, and when need was, I delivered 
diem. And when at length I permitted them to be slain by them, 
it was that by their blood they might set a seal to My faith and 
religion, and win the laurel crown of martyrdom. In the same 
manner I now send you : and through you I am about to do the 
same, yea still greater things. I will be always with you, and stand 
by you, that in life ye may by the innocency of sheep, and in death 
by the meekness of sheep, conquer all men and all things.” 

Therefore by these words, Behold I send you , are signified the 
Divine authority, power, assistance, and protection of Christ whereby 
He defends His Apostles, as it were innocent sheep, against the 
solves their enemies, that they may convert them by preaching, or 
else nobly vanquish them by dying. He therefore that will be Christ's 
true servant, disciple, and Apostle, let him look upon himself as 
sent forth like a sheep in the midst of wolves. So let him be lavish 
of his life, as though he were doomed, and prepared to endure 
labours and crosses, yea death itself, for Christ’s sake. Albanus, 
the Captain General of the army of Charles V., had 400 stout and 
resolute youths, who were prodigal of life, and devoted to death, 
called the forlorn hope. In a battle, he despatched these against the 
strongest part of the enemy's ranks, that by their audacity and deter* 
mination to die, they might throw those ranks into confusion, and 
so prepare the way for victory. Thus devoted and prodigal of his 
life let the Apostolic preacher of Christ deem himself, that he may 
subdue unbelievers to Christ the conqueror. Such a one blessed 
Xavier deemed himself, when he was going to the Indies, and said 
to his weeping friends : “ Do merchants at such expense and such 
peril, prodigal of life, sail to India from zeal for earthly merchandise ; 
and shall not I go thither for the sake of God and souls ?” 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


26 


S. MATTHEW, X. 


Be ye therefore itrise, &c. Wise, i.e., prudent i. “ That by pru- 
dence,” says S. Jerome, “ye may avoid snares, and by harmlessness 
or simplicity ye may do no evil And the craft of a serpent is given 
as an example, because with its whole body it hides its head, to 
protect that wherein is its life. So too let us, by the exposure of 
our whole body, guard Him who is our Head — Christ ; that is, let 
us strive to keep the faith whole and undefiled.” 2. Rabanus 
Maurus says, that the serpent is wont craftily to choose narrow 
chinks, so as by passing through them, to put off his old skin. 
Hear Isidore of Pelusium (lib. i. epist 26) : “The serpent by crafty 
artifice puts off his old skin, by compressing himself into some narrow 
chink. So Christ wishes us, by means of the narrow way and afflic- 
tion, to put off the old man and to put on instead the new man, 
which is renewed after His image.” 3. Remigius says, Beautifully 
doth the Lord admonish preachers to have the prudence of ser 
pents, because the first man was deceived by a serpent It was as 
though He had said, Because the enemy was crafty to deceive, do ye 
be prudent to deliver. He commended the Tree, do ye praise the 
virtue of the Cross. Hilary adds, He falsely promised immortality, 
saying, Ye shall be as gods ; do ye promise true immortality, that 
they who believe shall be as angels . 

4. The serpent has most clear sight. Whence the adage — the eye of 
a serpent \ So let an Apostle behold all things with the piercing sight 
of his mind, that he may avoid what is evil and forward what is good. 

And harmless (Vulg. simplices) as doves . Because, as Remigius 
says, “ Simplicity without prudence is easily deceived, and wisdom 
is dangerous unless it be tempered with simplicity.” And as S. 
Gregory says (lib. iv. epist 31 ad Mauritium), “ As the astuteness of 
the serpent sharpens the simplicity of the dove, so does the simpli- 
city of the dove temper the astuteness of the serpent” 

For harmless the Gr. is tucipaiot, which (if it be derived from A, 
privative, and rt'pac, a horn) means devoid of malice or harm, itino* 
cent, innocuous . So S. Basil : or if from A, privative, and Ktp&vwfu, 
to mingle, it is the same as unmixed, i.e., pure, sincere — those who, 
without prevarication, express with their mouths what they think in 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


WHO ARE THE PERSECUTORS NOW. *7 

their hearts. Christ therefore bids them “ by prudence avoid snares, 
by simplicity to do no evil, ,, says S. Jerome. 

S. Chrysos. says, anger is not extinguished by anger, but by meek- 
ness. It is not enough to bear evils, but we must not even be 
troubled, which is dove-like. 

Theoph. and Euthym. remark that doves, although they be 
deprived of their young ones, yet return to the same nests and 
masters. As though Christ said, “ So also, O ye Apostles, do not 
ye remember the injuries done unto you, but meekly and lovingly 
return ye to those who have vexed and injured you, that ye may 
help and convert them. This is the ninth precept of Christ The 
tenth follows. 

But beware of men, &c. Councils , Gr. trvvil^ mo , ue,, sessions of 
magistrates and judges; lest by them ye be condemned as blas- 
phemers of God, or rather of the gods. The Syriac has, They shall 
deliver you into the house of judgments, that is, into the proetoria. 
Beware of men — i, false and treacherous men, who shall bring you 
to councils and before judges. Such are those, who for this cause 
are to be guarded against by priests at this day in England, Scot- 
land, and Japan ; a, of men , viz,, insidious men, who lay snares for 
you by means of perplexing and political questions, that they may 
catch some word out of your mouth against the laws or sovereigns, 
that they may accuse you to them ; 3, of men, ue, persecutors, who 
seek to kill you. Beware, i.e,, bear yourselves cautiously, as far as 
may be, remembering your duty, so that ye may avoid their plots 
and treacheries ; but above all, that ye fall not by their persecutions 
and threats so as to deny Christ 

Moraliter, let every one leam to beware of himself, for man is a 
wolf toman. 

And so no one need say, I have been born in an inauspicious 
time, I cannot be a martyr. There is no Nero now, no Decius now. 
Any one can be a martyr if he manfully resist lusts, fears, tempta- 
tions, for the love of God. Thy cupidity is a Decius to thee, thy 
fear a Nero, thy temptation is a Julian. Thy companion persecutes 
thee — laughs at thee — calumniates thee. Fever, cold, asthma, torments 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



28 


S. MATTHEW, X* 


thee. If thou bear these patiently for the love of God, thou art a 
martyr of patience, like Job was. Gluttony goads thee to swill in wine 
and delicacies. Resist, and thou art a martyr of abstinence, like 
Daniel Ambition attracts thee to raise thyself above others, to aim 
at high dignities. Pluck it from thy mind, and thou art a martyr of 
humility and modesty, like S. Francis. Does thy superior bid thee 
do hard things, which are repugnant to thy feelings ? obey, conquer- 
ing thyself, and thou art a martyr of obedience, like Abraham, when 
he offered up Isaac. Does lust titillate thee ? Mortify it by fasting, 
crucify it by hair shirts, and thou wilt be a martyr of chastity, as 
Joseph was. Study, teach, preach, labour, go to the Indians, that 
thou mayest save perishing souls, and thou art a martyr of charity, 
like blessed Xavier. 

And in the synagogues , where the law was read, and breakers of the 
law were scourged, yt shall he beaten : Thus Peter and the Apostles 
were beaten (Acts v. 40). And S. Paul says (2 Cor. ii. 24), “ Of the 
Jews five times received I forty stripes save one.” 

And before governors , i.e. 9 of provinces. So Paul was led as a cap- 
tive before Felix and Festus, governors of Judea; James the Less 
before Ananias, the High Priest, by whom he was ordered to be 
slain ; Peter and James the Great before Agrippa, who struck off 
James’ head. Peter and Paul were brought to Nero, under whom 
they at length underwent a glorious martyrdom* Thus, too, S. 
Andrew was led to AEgeus, the pro-consul of Achaia, by whom he 
was crucified ; S. John to the Emperor Domitian, by whom he was 
placed in a cask of boiling oil, from which he gloriously came forth. 
From such things it will be seen that what Christ now says does not 
refer to this first sending the Apostles into Judea, for we do not read 
of any such things happening then, but of things which were to 
happen in their future life. 

For my sake . He adds, says S. Chrysostom, an alleviation which 
was no small consolation, that they should suffer for Christ’s sake. 
Wherefore when the Apostles were beaten, “ they went from the 
Council rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame 
for His name.* 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


EXAMPLE OF S. LUCY. 


29 


bor a testimony of my true faith which ye preach : for of this your 
martyrdom shall be an illustrious testimony. Hence, many who saw 
the constancy of the Apostles and Martyrs under their torments were 
converted to Christ So S. Hilary. 

But when they shall deliver you, &c. This is the eleventh precept 
of Christ, by which he forbids the Apostles being anxious about 
their answers to the questions of the governors, because He promises 
that He will Himself suggest to them what they shall be. The Gr. is 
p) pepifjLvfjaijre, i.e., do not be anxious and solicitous . He does not forbid 
their prudently premeditating an answer, but forbids an anxious and 
troubled care about it. By the martyr in his questionings and tor- 
ments God must be assiduously invoked that He may inspire him 
with wisdom to answer, and courage to endure. This is what Luke 
says Christ promised, I will give you a mouth and wisdom which none 
of your adversaries shall be able to gainsay or resist. Thus it is said of 
S. Stephen, 44 They were not able to resist the wisdom and spirit with 
which he spake." There is a famous example of the literal fulfilment 
of this promise in the life of Saint Lucy of Syracuse who, when she 
was ordered by the governor Paschasius to sacrifice to the gods, 
boldly refused. The prefect said in a threatening tone, “ Your words 
will cease when you come to be scourged.” The Virgin answered, 
"Words can never be wanting to God's servants when the Lord 
Christ has said, 4 When ye stand before kings and governors take no 
thought how or what ye shall answer, for it shall be given you in 
that same hour what ye shall say, for it is not ye that speak, but the 
Holy Ghost which speaketh in you.' ” Then Paschasius asked her, "Is 
the Holy Spirit in thee ? ” She replied, “ Those who live chastely 

and holily are the temple of the Holy Spirit." Then he said, 44 1 will 
command thee to be taken to the house of shame, and then the Holy 
Spirit will leave thee.” The Virgin answered, 44 If you order me to 
suffer violence against my will, my chastity shall receive a double 
crown.” Then Paschasius was inflamed with rage, and commanded 
her to be led to the house of shame ; but by the power of God it 
came to pass that by no force could the Virgin be removed from the 
place where she stood. Observe the wonderful prudence of this 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


3 <> 


S. MATTHEW, X. 


Virgin, who to every question answered wisely, so that the governor 
was put to silence. Of a truth the Holy Ghost spake in her. 

1 'ropologically. S. Austin (lib. iv. De Doctrin* Christian*, c. 15) 
teaches that a preacher ought to pray and study before his sermon : 
but for the actual time when he is speaking he ought to think that 
the Lord’s words are applicable to a good mind — Take no thought 
how or what ye shall speak, & c. 

Brother shall deliver the brother to death , Ac. Because they believe 
in Me and preach Me. Christ fortifies beforehand the Apostles and 
believers by predicting the persecutions which they were about to 
suffer from their unbelieving relations, who (forgetful of natural ties 
and affections) would persecute them even unto death. As Bede 
says, “ He foretold the future trouble, in order that, being known 
beforehand, they might more easily bear it” “ For the darts which 
are seen coming are less likely to strike,” says S. Hilary. As 
examples of the fulfilment of these words, S. Barbara was killed by 
her own father for the faith of Christ So, too, was S. Christina. 
S. Lucia was accused by her own son Euprepius of being a Christian, 
and was crowned by the judge with the martyr’s laurel on the 16th 
of September, a.d. 303. S. Wenceslas, prince of Bohemia, was 
treacherously killed by his brother Boleslas and his mother Draho- 
mira, who were unbelievers. The Emperor Maximian caused his 
sister Artemias, a Christian, and Diocletian, his wife Serena, Pope S. 
Caius, and his brother S. Gabinus, with his holy daughter Susanna, 
his cousins, to suffer martyrdom because they were Christians. 

And ye shall be hated of all men, &c. All — that is, many, almost 
all, as was wont to be in councils, judgment-halls, and theatres where 
the martyrs were. For the faith and preaching of Christ crucified 
was at the first new and paradoxical to the whole world. Where- 
fore both Jews (who were accustomed to Moses) and Gentiles (who 
were attached to their gods) rose up against the Apostles, who 
preached this doctrine, and against the little flock of believers 
who were converted to it 

But he that shall endure, i.e., in patience. For the Gr. is 6 (nr o- 
lulvui, he who shall sustain these persecutions and adversities 


Digitized by 


Google 


WHEN FLIGHT IS PERMITTED — WHEN NOT. 31 

even unto the end at once of his persecutions and his life, he wholly 
and solely shall be saved. He shall be endowed with health, happi- 
ness, and eternal glory as the reward and crown of his patience. 
It is not enough to have endured and overcome once, twice, or 
thrice : but to win the crown we must endure and conquer to the 
end, according to those words in the Apoc. : “ Be thou faithful unto 
death, and I will give thee the crown of life.” See what I have 
there said. Hear S. Bernard (Epis. 129): “Perseverance merits 
glory for men, a crown for virtues. It is the vigour of strength, the 
consummation of virtues; it is a nurse of merit, a winner of reward, 
a sister of patience, a bulwark of sanctity. Take away perseverance, 
and there is neither reward for obedience, nor grace for well-doing, 
nor praise for fortitude.” 

But when they shall persecute you, &c. — Flee, “not,” says Bede, 
“from fearing suffering, but by yielding, so that the occasion of 
tribulation may become the seed of the Gospel,” lest by the slaying 
of the preachers the preaching of the faith should be cut off, but by 
their fleeing it may be scattered in other places. This flight was 
indeed victory. For they fled not through fear, but from love to 
Christ, that they might propagate His faith. So the Tartars, as they 
flee, cast their darts at their pursuing enemies, and so transfix and 
slay them. 

You will ask whether this be a precept, or only a permission. I 
reply, it is partly a precept, as when the necessity of the Church, or 
the faith, or peril of one's own fall, requires flight. For “he does 
not deny Christ by flying, who flies lest he should deny," says S. 
Chrysos. So S. Nazian. (Orat 1 in Julian) and Athanasius (de fug& 
suA), For had he not fled from the rage of the Arians, they would 
have triumphed over the Homoousian faith, which seemed to stand 
or foil with Athanasius. It is partly of counsel, as when greater 
benefit is expected for oneself or others from flight. It is partly a 
permission, as when any one has an excessive dread of torments ; 
and he is not bound by any necessity or obligation (as being a 
bishop or pastor, for example) to remain in a particular place. For 
otnerwise it is unlawful to flee if peril, or scandal, be likely to accrue 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


■>2 S. MATTHEW, X. 

to the Faith, the Sacraments, or the Sheep, the faithful. This is 
plain from John x. n, 12. 

Hence the example of Christ, of His Apostles, of S. Athanasius 
and others is a refutation of Tertullian who in his book, de Fugd, 
contends that flight is unlawful. S. Jer. (in Catal. Scriptor. Ecclesiast 
in Tertul.) shews that this book was one of those which he wrote 
against the Church after he became a heretic and a Montanist 

Verily I say unto you , ye shall not have gone over , &c. The Gr. is 
oh fiil Tt\ioi\Tt^ye shall not have finished ] that is, traversing and converting 
the cities of Israel. 1. S. Chrysos, explains it of the first mission of the 
Apostles into Judea ; as much as to say, flee from the city where 
they persecute into another ; for ye shall not have gone over all the 
cities of Palestine until I shall return to you, and recall you to me. 
But in this first mission the Apostles were kindly received by the 
Jews, so that there was no need for them to flee. They came back 
to Christ rejoicing, as we see by Luke x. 17. 

2. Bede expounds thus, “Ye shall not have converted the Jews 
before my resurrection. After that I will return to you and send you 
to the Gentiles dispersed throughout the world, where you shall 
have a perpetual field for your labours.” 

3. Others say, “ Ye shall not have gone over Judea, preaching and 
fleeing away until I return to it in vengeance by means of Vespasian 
and Titus, that I may cut off the Jews who have persecuted you.” 

4. And correctly, “Ye shall not, by journeying and preaching, 
perfect in the faith of the Gospel and the religion of Christ, the cities, 
that is the people of Israel, to whom I am now sending you before 
the second advent of the Son of Man.” For as S. Paul teaches in 
Romans xl, it behoveth that the fulness of the Gentiles, i.e., all the 
Gentiles must come first into the Church, and then all Israel shall be 
saved. Christ intimates that the Jews shall disbelieve the Gospel 
until the end of the world, but then, a little before the judgment, 
they will be converted by Enoch and Elias. So S. Hilary. 

Thus far are the precepts which Christ gave to His Apostles. 
There now follow promises and inducements by which He animates 
them generously to rise superior to persecutions. The first mauce- 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



HOW CHRIST BORE REPROACH. 


33 


ment is Christ himself (ver. 24), who suffered more from the Jews 
than they would The second is in ver. 26, that God| after the per- 
secutions would make manifest the truth of the Gospel to the glory 
of Christ and the Apostles. Thirdly, in ver. 28, that God who is the 
Lord of the soul is rather to be feared than the persecutor of the body. 
Fourth, in ver. 29. Because God has a special care for them. Fifth, 
ver. 32. Because God will honour them in the presence of the angels 
and glorify diem eternally. 

The disciple, & c. Christ here animates His disciples to bear perse- 
cutions, says S. Chrys. by His own example. The disciple and the 
servant, such as ye are to Me, O ye Apostles, ought not to seek 
for greater honour and applause of men than his Master has. 

It is enough for the disciple, &c. That is to say, if the Jews have 
derided and caluminated Me, and called Me Beelzebub, ie., a friend 
and associate of Beelzebub — Me, who am Christ your Master and 
Lord, yea the Head of your family — i£ I say, they have dared to do 
such things against Me, who have proved Myself by so many 
miracles to be Messiah and the Son of God, how much more will 
they dare to do like things to you, My disciples and servants ! 
And if I quietly and bravely bear such things from them, how 
much rather ought ye to bear these things, yea even rejoice in them, 
because ye bear them for My sake, and in bearing them are made 
like unto me, and are, as it were, adorned with My raiment and My 
ornaments ! 

Hear what S. Hilary says upon this passage, “Let no kind of 
injuries, or reproaches in any wise affright us ; but let us rather 
embrace them as our glory, if only we may be made conformable to 
our Lord and His sufferings.” And as Tertullian says (lib. de bono 
Martyrii, c. 9.) “ Since the Lord and Master Himself has suffered per- 
secution, betrayal and death, how much more ought His disciples and 
servants to fulfil the same things, lest they should seem to be 
superior to Him in being exempt from evil; since this ought 
to suffice them for glory that they are made conformable to 
the sufferings of their Lord and Master.” Whence S. Ambrose says 
(fib. 2, de Abraham, c. 7.) “ The soul going forth to war bears not 

VOL. 11. » 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



34 


8. MATTHEW, X. 


before her the likenesses of eagles or dragons ; but in the cross of 
Christ and in the name of Jesus she goes out to battle, strong with 
this sign, faithful to this standard.” 

S. Jerome (Fpist. 39, ad. Marcel) speaking of Blesilla, the daughter 
of S. Paula, who after the death of her husband became a nun, and was 
derided by the world, writes, “ Our Blesilla will laugh, and will count 
it no disgrace to hear the revilings of croaking frogs, when her Master 
was called Beelzebub.” 

You will ask who and what was Beelzebub ? He was the god and 
idol of the Ekronites. See 2 Kin. L 2, 3, 6. He is so called from 
Baal zebub , Le., the lord of the fly , or possessing flies, because he 
was worshipped and invoked against the pest of flies. Thus among 
the Greeks, Jupiter had the title of Atto/ivoc, or averter of flies, because 
they worshipped him that he might drive away flies. Thus the in- 
habitants of Cyrene when swarms of flies brought a pestilence, 
invoked the god Achor to drive them away, as Pliny tells us (lib. 8,c. 28). 
This idol Beelzebub seems also to have had the head of a fly. For 
the Sept, translates Beelzebub, the Lord Fly. Similarly the Egyptians 
represented the god Apis with the head and figure of an ox, Anubis 
of a dog, Hammon of a ram, and so on. Hence the Jews called 
Lucifer the prince of the devils, partly in derision partly from abomi- 
nation, the Fly God, or the god of flies. I say more upon Beelzebub 
on 2 Kin. L ver. 2. 

The Gr. codices in this place, as well as in Mar. iiL 22, and Lu. 
xi. 15, 18, 19, also Theophyl and others, always read Beelzebub, 
which some interpret to mean, Jupiter siercorarius, or the dungy 
Jove : for though zebal in Hebrew means a habitation, zcbel 
in Chald., Syriac, and Arabic, signifies dung, because the 
devil is, by reason of sin, most unclean, and so stirs men up to 
commit all uncleanness, especially the sins of drunkenness and im- 
purity. This is perhaps the origin of the name zebulus, or zabulus 
which S. Hilary and others of the ancients give to the devil, unless 
you prefer to derive it from the iEolic za for Sia, that is, zabulus 
instead of diabolus. 

Fear them not therefore, &c. The Gr. is a beautiful paronomasia, 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


HARKS OP A PERFECT MAN. 35 

or pun. There is nothing hid which shall not be unhid, nothing covered 
which shall not be uncovered. 

The meaning is, “ Although the Jews slander you as bemg not of 
God, but the Apostles and ambassadors of Beelzebub, yet fear ye 
not their derision or contempt, for God will in the end make plain 
your innocence and true religion, not only in the day of judgment, 
but even in this life.” So S. Chrysos. 

It might also be explained thus — “ Do not fear or shrink, O My 
Apostles from preaching My Gospel, for although but few may 
believe in the beginning, that it may appear hidden and concealed, 
yet it shall creep on by degrees, and its truth shall at length be 
known, and shall shine forth through the world.” 

Hear S. Ambr. (lib. de yacob. et vit. beat. c. 8), “ It is the 
part of a perfect man not to succumb to those things which seem to 
most, terrible and dreadful, but like a brave soldier to sustain the 
onset of the severest troubles. Thus S. Vincent acted when in his 
torments, he answered back the tyrant, “ Thou shalt see that I have 
more power when I am tormented than thou hast when thou art 
tormenting.” So too the Apostles shone the more brightly in the 
darkness of persecution. Of their virtue S. Bernard speaks (Serm. 
xxviL in Cant.), “As stars shine in the night, but are unseen by 
day, so does true virtue, which in prosperity often appears not, 
become conspicuous in adversity.” 

What Isay unto you, &c. Since the roofs of the houses in Judea 
are flat, it was possible to preach from them as from a lofty pulpit 
S. Jerome gives a threefold meaning, i. What ye have heard in a 
mystery, that preach ye plainly. 2. What ye have learned in secret, 
that speak ye in public. 3. What I have taught you in this one 
corner of Judea, boldly evangelize to the whole world. 

Mystically, S. Austin, “ What I say in darkness, ije., in fear, preach 
ye in the light, Le., in the confidence of the truth.” 

And feat not them which kill , &c. Do not, from fear of death 
with which the persecutors threaten you, deny My faith, or cease 
from the preaching which I have commanded you, for if ye do this, 
ye will incur the far worse death of the soul, even its eternal death 

d 2 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



36 


S. MATTHEW, X. 


in hell. Truly does S. Chrys. say (Ifom. 5 ad pop!) “ He who is 
always afraid of hell will never fall into its flames.” 

This saying of Christ has reference to a most needful precept He 
bids us that we must not, through fear of tyrants, break the faith 
which we have pledged to God, nor violate His law. It may be 
further extended to things which are counselled, not commanded; but 
then it is a matter of counsel, not of precept. Thus Pope S. Clement 
extended it to the counsel of virginity. When SS. Nereus and 
Achilleus, the servants of S. Flavia Domitilla, who had been be- 
trothed to Aurelian the son of the Roman consul, counselled her to 
embrace virginity, and asked S. Clement to give her the veil, he 
answered bravely, “ For you, for her, and for me, I perceive there is 
prepared the palm of martyrdom. But forasmuch as Christ has laid 
it down that we must not fear them which kill the body, let us dis- 
regard mortals, that we may plainly and wholly obey the Author of 
everlasting life.” He therefore consecrated Domitilla, a virgin; 
which when Aurelian her betrothed heard, he beheaded SS. Nereus 
and Achilleus, and banished S. Domitilla to Pontus, where she 
completed her martyrdom by fire. At last S. Clement, being 
drowned in the sea, obtained the same palm. Thus were there four 
glorious victims of virginity. And the heroism of their action con- 
sisted in this — that it would have been lawful for them to persuade 
Domitilla to avoid the persecution by marrying Aurelian. But the 
love of chastity and of Christ gained the victory. 

Victorinus of Utica (lib. 3. Watidal. persecute .) relates that a matron 
named Dionysia, when she was exposed naked upon a lofty place 
and beaten with rods by the Arians, bravely answered, “Ye 
servants of the devil, that which ye think ye do to my shame is 
indeed my praise.” And when she beheld her only son, a little 
child turn pale at the torments, she animated him by reminding 
him of hell, lest the King should say to his servants, “ Cast him into 
outer darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.” 
“ That is the life,” she said, “ to be desired which is always in pos- 
session.” And strengthening her child with these words, she soon 
made him a martyr. Thus far Victor. He relates in the same place 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


THE MARTYR V1CT0RIANUS. 


37 


that Victorianus, the proconsul of Carthage, being asked by the 
ambassadors of King Hunneric to become an Arian, answered, 
u Being firm in God and Christ my Lord, I will tell ye what ye shall 
answer to your king : 1 Let him torment me with fire, let him expose 
me to beasts, let him excruciate me with every kind of torment ; if 
I should consent unto him, it would be in vain that I have been 
baptized into the Catholic Church. For if this present life were all, 
and we did not hope for another which is indeed eternal, still even 
so, I would not do what he requires for the sake of a little tem- 
poral glory, and be ungrateful to Him who hath bestowed His faith 
upon me who believe in Him.' At this reply the King was so 
enraged that no speech can express for how long and with what 
punishments he afflicted him. But he triumphing, and making in the 
Lord a happy consummation, received the martyr's crown." Thus 
Victor. Wisely spoke the martyr S. Flavian, “The body does not 
feel torments when the mind is in heaven, and has devoted itself to 
God with all its strength." 

Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing, &c. Farthing, this is the 
Roman as, Gr. assarion. It is a diminutive, and means a little as. 
For the assarius was the half, not of the ancient as, which was a 
pound, but of the later as, which was half an ounce. So that the 
assarius was the fourth part of the uncia, or ounce of brass, and 
therefore of very small value. This, which Enthym. renders by 
terunciola, or a little farthing was the price of two sparrows in Judea 
in the time of Christ 

Shall not fall upon the earth . For birds live in the air, and when 
they are pierced with arrows, or perish from any other cause, they 
fell to the earth. Without your Father : ie., without His providence 
and pleasure. If God hath so great care and providence of these 
little sparrows, what will he have of you ? For He is your Father, in 
that he hath given you reason, for similitude to Himself And He 
hath re-formed you in Christ, and made you like unto Christ 

Symbolically , S. Hilary says : “ The two sparrows are the body and 
the soul, which are bom as it were sparrows, that they should fly with 
spiritual wings toward Heaven, but the sinner sells them for an as. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


38 S. MATTHEW, X. 

that is, a little pleasure, to the devil, that they may go down to 
hell” 

But the hairs of your head, &c. That is, God from eternity 
hath appointed and decreed not only the number of your members, 
but even of your hairs. Wherefore He knows it exactly, and dili- 
gently keeps them to the number which He willeth, so that not one 
can fall without His special providence, as Luke saith. 

Allegorically , the hairs of Christ are all the elect and those who 
shall be saved, for these adorn Christ as hair does the head. Tropo- 
logically, hairs are all the thoughts, words, and deeds of the faithful. 
So S. Cyril {lib. 8 in Levit .). Again, hairs are the minutest thoughts 
and intentions of the Saints. So Damascene. 

Feat ye not therefore, ye are of more value, Syr. more excellent. The 
Gr. is ha (ftifxre ye are preferable, ye excel. If God have such care of 
sparrows, much more will he have of you, Wherefore, rest secure in 
the fatherly bosom of His Providence in all persecutions and tribula- 
tions whatsoever. For He will deliver you out of them all, either by 
freeing you from them, or else by giving you the crown of martyrdom, 
and taking you to heaven, where there will be no more labour or pain. 

Whosoever therefore shall confess Me, &c. From this word confess , 
martyrs were anciently called confessors. Shall confess Me. The Gr. 
is iv ifwl, Le., in Me. For I will confess him, the Gr. is iv a vr£, i.e., 
in him. And so Tertullian reads {in Scorpiace c. 9). So also S. Luke 
xil 5. It is a Hebraism. For the Heb. constructs verbs of contact, 
whether bodily, mental, or spiritual contact, with the prep, a, in. 
The Heb. would be hoda bi, confess in Me, meaning confess Me. This 
is plain from the antithesis, shall deny Me. Maldonatus, however, 
takes it differently— shall confess, Le., shall glory in Me, answering to 
the Heb. hithraddeh, which, being in the Hithpael, has a reflexive 
force. To confess in oneself, Le,, to glory. 

The meaning is, whosoever, in the presence of tyrants, being in- 
terrogated concerning the faith, shall generously and constantly con- 
fess that he believeth in Me as the Messiah and the Son of God, him 
will I in like manner profess before God, and angels, and men, to be 
My disciple, and as such will I honour and glorify him. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



ON MARTYRDOM. 


$9 


Martyrdom is the confession of Christ and the profession of Chris- 
tianity, even to torments and a cruel death, and therefore it is the 
highest love and honouring of Christ Wherefore the Apostles and 
Apostolic men have most ardently desired martyrdom. & Ignatius 
in his Epistle to the Romans, says, “ My love is crucified. There is 
not in me a fire of earthly, but of heavenly fuel. And I have living 
water which saith inwardly, Come to the Father.” S. Basil says 
(Him. 19 in S. Gordium, Mart.), “The martyrs speedily attain to 
heavenly glory by a violent and premature death. They endeavour 
speedily to migrate from this life, which ought rather to be called a 
lingering death, by means of short toil” We see, therefore, that he 
does not call death death, but as S. Sophia said to her daughter 
Anastasia (apud Surium, Octob. 25), “A good thing is departure from 
an evil world. It is joy, gladness, pleasure, splendour, beauty, light, 
a sweeter and fairer than earthly light.” S. Anthony, as S. Athana- 
sius testifies, when those who were about to become martyrs in the 
persecution of Maximian were being carried to Alexandria, rushed 
out of his monastery, and followed these victims of Christ, saying, 
“ Let us advance to the glorious triumphs of our brethren, that we 
may join them in their conflict” 

Tertullian thus concludes his apology in behalf of Christ and 
Christians — “ Well, then, do this, O ye excellent governors, since ye 
will be so much more acceptable to the populace, when ye have 
sacrificed the Christians to them. Crucify, torment, condemn us, 
tear our bodies to pieces. Your wickedness is the sure proof of our 
innocency. God has a meaning in allowing us to suffer. For when 
ye condemn a Christian woman to pollution rather than to a lion, ye 
confess that a stain upon modesty is reckoned by us to be far more 
dreadful than any death. And still all your most exquisite cruelties 
produce no effect 3 they only induce men to join us. We are multi- 
plied as often as you reap us. The blood of the Christians is their seed.” 

This same Tertullian wrote his Scorpiace against the Gnostics, who 
taught that it was permitted under torture to deny Christ with the 
mouth, so long as His faith were retained in the heart. The Pris- 
cillianists afterwards taught the same, whose motto was, “ Rights, 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


40 


S. MATTHEW, X. 


peijuries, secrets, betray not” In the Scorpiace f i.e., an antidote 
against scorpions, meaning Gnostics, Tertullian treats altogether ot 
the good of martyrdom. S. Cyprian, too, following Tertullian as a 
master, according to his wont, wonderfully extols the martyrs and 
martyrdom. In his Epistle to the Martyrs , among other eulogiums, 
he scatters the following : “ The martyr is made a colleague of the 
Passion of Christ The martyrs give us a school of morals : the 
confessors shew us the beginning of virtues. The martyrs shall be 
assessors with Christ in the judgment. The martyrs obtain the king- 
dom of heaven without delay. The martyrs receive fruit a hundred- 
fold. The prayer of the martyrs deserves to be heard by God. By 
the triumphs of the martyrs the church is made glad. Martyrdom 
by the baptism of blood is of all things the most excellent” 

Lastly, the Standard Bearer, the Pnnce and the Captain of the 
Martyrs, is Christ Wherefore, the primitive bishops and fathers, as 
Julian the Apostate unwillingly acknowledged, “All flew to martyrdom 
like bees to a bee-hive,” to use S. Chrysostom’s words. S. Hubert, 
the successor of S. Lambert the martyr in the see of Liege, was wont 
to sigh because he was not his successor in martyrdom likewise. 
“O unhappy I,” he said, “whose sins have accumulated in such a 
heap that I am not worthy to be associated with such a man.” 

I have collected many more notes upon Martyrdom in Hosea, 
c. xi. sub finem. See also Victor of Utica on the Vandal persecution 
{lib. 2, 3), where he relates that when many of the orthodox were 
thrust by Hunneric, the Arian king, like swarms of locusts, into a 
narrow dungeon, full of every kind of filth, where the horror of the 
overpowering stench was worse than any torture, even here the 
Martyrs sang with exultation this hymn to the Lord, “ Such honour 
have all His Saints.” 

Think not that I am cotne } &c., that is to say, earthly peace: for Christ 
promised by Isaiah (ix. 6 and 7, and lxv. 25), that He would bring 
spiritual peace of mind, the peace of the union of the faithful among 
themselves, and with God and His Angels, which leads to peace and 
everlasting felicity in Heaven. 

But a sword: Le., separation , as S. Luke has (xii. 51), discord in 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


HOW CHRIST SEPARATES MEN. 


41 


faith and religion. He means that He will separate His faithful 
people by reason of their faith from unbelievers. But the unbelievers 
will on their part take occasion to separate themselves from the faithful, 
and will hate them, and will deprive them of liberty and goods and 
life. This is what Christ especially refers to in what follows ; and 
this too entirely answers to the words of Micah (vii. 6) from which 
Christ here quotes. 

I am come to separate , &c. A marts foes shall be they of his own 
household \ Syriac. A man shall have as his enemies the sons of his 
own house. Because, as S. Chrys. says (Horn. 2 , cont. yudceos ), it shall 
come to pass that in the same house there shall be one faithful 
believer in Christ, whilst another shall continue unbelieving. A 
father will wish his son to return back from the faith to his former 
impiety. Foretelling this He saith, I am come to separate . Such shall 
be the victorious power of the Gospel that sons shall disregard their 
parents, daughters their mothers, and parents their children, and shall 
adventure their life and all things for the sake of godliness. Some 
are of opinion that Christ only applies the passage of Micah, using it 
in a different sense. But I reply that Micah was speaking literally 
of the calamity of sinful Jerusalem through the siege of the Chaldeans, 
as S. Jerome shows — that in it the inhabitants should be so distressed 
by sword and famine and pestilence that even brother would snatch 
away bread from brother, child from parent, wife from husband. But, 
allegorically this strife of the Jews signifies the discord and opposition 
of unbelieving parents and brethren and husbands against believers, 
whether Jews, or Gentiles in the time of Christ, especially when the 
faithful ran into peril of goods and fame, and even life itself. In this 
allegorical sense Christ cites Micah's words : and in an allegoiy, or 
parable it is not necessary to apply every word. 

He that loveth father , & c. That is, is not worthy to have Me for 
his Lord and Master, is not worthy of My name and company, My 
grace and kingdom, and the rest of My promises. The reason is, 
because Christ forasmuch as He is our God and Lord and Saviour, 
must be far preferred to parents and children. Wherefore he who 
prefers them to Christ so as for their sakes to revolt from the faith of 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



42 


S. MATTHEW, X. 


Christ, treats Him unworthily, and does Him the highest dishonour. 
So S. Jerome and others. S. Saturus, when Hunneric threatened him 
that unless he became an Arian, he would give his wife in marriage 
to his camel driver, and when his wife, trembling at this, besought 
him to consent unto the king, answered like another Job, “Thou 
speakest as one of the foolish women speaketh. I should dread it, 
O woman, if there were nothing but the bitter sweetness of this life. 
Thou ministerest, O my wife to the artifices of the devil If thou 
lovedst thy spouse, thou wouldst never drag thine own husband to 
the second death. Let them tear away my children, let them separate 
my wife, let them take away my substance, yet will I rest secure upon 
the promises of my Lord. I will hold fast the words, ‘Whosoever 
forsaketh not wife, or children, or lands, or houses, he cannot be My 
disciple.' ” So Victor of Utica, 

And he thattaketh not (from the hand of the Lord upon his shoulders 
to bear it like Christ) his cross , &c. To bear the cross is to be ready 
for the sake of Christ to bear reproaches, stripes, imprisonments, and 
the most painful and ignominious death, such as was the death of the 
cross, which Christ vouchsafed to bear for us. Because, as S. Chrys. 
says, speaking in the name of Christ “ As I have brought you the 
utmost blessedness ; so I ask of you a singular obedience and affec- 
tion, that ye may be as lions in battle array.” Christ alludes to His 
future bearing of His own Cross. For it is altogether just and right, 
that after Christ bearing His cross for us, we also should follow Him, 
bearing our cross with love and reverence, and thus walk towards 
heaven. This is the exact literal sense. 

Mystically , the Cross is mortification. Listen to the Gloss, “ The 
Cross is borne in two ways, either when the body is affected by 
abstinence, or when the mind is touched with compassion for one's 
neighbour. Their neighbours' sins are an instrument of torture to 
the Saints.” 

Lastly, S. Jerome says, “ It is written in another Gospel, He that 
taketh not his Cross daily , lest we should suppose that a burning faith 
would suffice once for all : the Cross must be always carried, that we 
may show that we always love Christ” 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



HOW TO FIND ONE’S LIFE. 


43 


He that findeih his life , &c. Findeth ought to be in the past tense ; 
for the Gr. is (o tvpuv). The meaning is, He that findeth his life 
( } bx^ y )y that is, the corporeal safety of his life, when in peril of death 9 
through denial of the faith, and of My name, such a one shall lose 
his soul (ypvxWy that is, the eternal salvation of his soul, which alone 
is real safety, and shall go away into hell. And, on the other hand, 
he who shall lose the present life of his soul or his life, on 

account of his profession of My name, he shall find health and 
safety, and the eternal happiness and gloiy of his soul (^xW> 
or life. 

He therefore who indulges his soul, loses it : he who mortifies it, 
saves it See the paradox which there is here. Life is made to con- 
sist in death, and death in life. Whence Tertullian says in his Scorpiace, 
“God hath willed to destroy death by death, tb shake off torments 
by torments, to give life by taking it away, to heal the flesh by wound- 
ing it, to save the soul by casting it away.” 

Observe the Heb. is matsa, Le., he hath found. Understand, he hath 
acquired, he hath gotten, he hath obtained, as the LXX. trans. in Job iii. 
22 : and the Vulg. in i. Sam. xxxi. 3. Similarly the Gr. ivpioKut, literally, 
/ light upon, frequently means, I obtain, rescue* I deliver, &c. The 
Latin invenire, lit to come upon, means to acquire or obtain anything. 
Thus any one is said to find, that is to obtain grace, favour, praise. 
So Gabriel said to the Blessed Virgin, Thou hast found favour, or 
grace with God, i.e., Thou hast come into favour with God : thou hast 
gained the love of God. In Gen. xxvi. 12, it is said, “ Isaac sowed in 
that land, and found, i.e., gained in that same year a hundred- 
fold.” ( Vulg.) For what any one finds sprung up in his field, that he 
gains. So here, He that findeth his life, that is, who gains it when it 
is as it were lost, and causes it as though to come to him afresh by 
denying Christ, this man shall lose it in another and a better life. 

Again matsa, he hath found, denotes liberty, sufficiency, abundance, 
power. So in Ps. xxl 9, “ Let Thy hand be found by all Thine 
enemies.” ( Vulg.) That is, let it suffice, let it be stronger and more 
powerful than Thine enemies. So here to find the soul is to acquire 
the liberty of the soul (anima), i.e., of the life, and abundance of pos- 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


44 


S. MATTHEW, X. 


sessions, by denying the faith. For this was what kings and tyrants 
were wont to promise to those who would deny Christ 

He that receiveth you, Ac. For he who receive* an ambassador, 
in the ambassador receive* *e king who ha* sent him. The 
Apostles were *e ambassadors of Christ, and Christ of God. He, 
therefore, who receive* them, receive* Christ in *em, and in Christ, 
God Himself — according to *ese words of S. Paul — “ We are 
ambassadors for Christ, as *ough God did beseech you by us.” 
And again, in *e Epistle to *e Galatians, “ Ye did not reject me, 
but received me as an angel of God, even as Christ Jesus.” Christ 
here proposes *e rewards of *ose who should receive *e Apostles, 
that He may make provision for *e Apostles in *e poverty which 
He commanded them to observe — as, for instance, when they were 
preaching, that He might streng*en them in it, and might invite 
hosts to show them liberal hospitality. 

He that receiveth a prophet, &c. A prophet, i.e,, a teacher and 
preacher of *e Gospel such as *e Apostles were. For formerly *e 
office of *e prophets was not only to predict future events, but to 
teach *e people, and preach *e law and word of God. 

Shall receive a prophets reward, or hire (merces, Vulg.) Some ex- 
plain this as though reward from a prophet: and that far surpassing 
*e hospitality which *ey .have shown, because *ey shall receive 
from *e prophet *e grace and fai* of Christ, and *e benefit of *e 
prophet’s prayers. 

2. Eu*ymius. A prophets reivard — ue., shall be equal to a prophet 
in his reward, shall be accounted worthy of equal honours wi* him. 

3. And best Shall receive , &c., because as he co-operates wi* 
*e prophet, and assists him because he is a prophet and a preacher, 
so shall he be partaker of his labour, bis merit, and his reward, 
and yet not in equal degree, but proportionably wi* *e prophet, 
according to *e co-operation and love wi* which he co-operates 
wi* *e preacher. For so by common law *e receivers of thieves 
and robbers are awarded similar (*ough not equal) punishment wi* 
*e *ieves *emselves. Thus S. Chrysostom explains : M He shall 
receive that reward of a prophet which it is fitting that he should 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


MEANING OF A PROPHET'S REWARD. 


45 


receive who receives a prophet.” S. Gregory ( Horn . 20 in Evang.) 
says the same. Although the elm bears no fruit of itselfj yet it 
supports the vine with its grapes : thus she makes her own what she 
kindly sustains of another’s. 

The same rule is indicated by the old law of war. “There shall 
be an equal share to him who goeth down into the battle with him 
who remaineth by the baggage. They shall alike divide the spoils.” 
(1 Sam. xxx. 24). A prophets reward, then, is that he shall receive 
the reward of his prophecy, or his preaching, because he assisted 
and promoted it ; for without that assistance the preacher could not 
have preached, forasmuch as he would have lacked food. 

Lasdy, by a prophets reward some understand the gift of pro- 
phecy; which S. Jerome (On Obadiah) thinks the prophet Obadiah 
obtained because he fed the prophets with bread and water in 
Jezebel’s persecution. “Forasmuch as he nourished a hundred 
prophets, he received the grace of prophecy, and from a prince 
became a general of the Church’s army. He fed at that time a little 
flock in Samaria; now he feeds the churches of Christ throughout 
all the world.” S. Epiphanius, S. Isidore, and others think the same, 
though it is more probable that the Obadiah of 1 Kin. 18 and the 
fourth of the Minor Prophets were different persons, as I have shown 
in the preface to Obadiah. 

He that receiveth a righteous man, &c. In the same way as I have 
said of a prophet Yea, though such a one shall be in sin, he shall 
receive the grace of repentance, and shall be made righteous. For 
to this men are often brought by the word and example of saints 
who are their guests, who obtain the grace of repentance by their 
prayers. So S. Francis, being received by a soldier to hospitality, 
foretold his speedy death, persuaded him to make his confession, 
and obtained from God his eternal salvation. For as soon as the 
soldier had confessed, he expired. (See S. Bonaventura, in his Life, 
c. 11.) 

And whosoever shall give to drink, &c. Cold water, as the cheapest 
of all things, and within the competence of the poorest to bestow. 
He does not say. savs S. Jerome, warm water, lest any one should 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



46 


S. MATTHEW, X. 


make the want of fuel an excuse. And he does not speak of a 
goblet, or a flagon, but He says a cup, or glass. For who is so poor 
that he could not give, or at least cany, a cup of water? S. Augus- 
tine gives the same explanation. 

In the name of a disciple* <>., because he is My disciple, because he 
adheres to My teaching, and believes in Me. For this having respect 
to Christ, ennobles and exalts both the intention of the giver and the 
work itself ; that which is given to a Christian, Christ esteems as 
bestowed upon Himself, and as such recompenses it with a great 
reward. For if you should do the same work for a different reason, 
because the person benefited is your servant, or relation, or friend, 
the deed is of little or no merit in the eyes of God. For this would 
be an alms, or an act of natural pity ; but the former an act of super- 
natural mercy. So theologians and Suarez {lib. 2, de necessitat. 
gratia* c. xvi. 10). By these words of Christ it is intimated that a 
work of mercy done to a man only because he is a man, is of the 
natural order : but if it be done because he is a believer, a fellow 
citizen with the saints, and of the household of God, it is a work of 
mercy of a higher, that is, of a supernatural order. 

An illustrious example of this occurs in the life of S. Anastasia, 
V. and M. After her tongue had been cut off (Lat prctsdnde- 
retur ), and her teeth knocked out, being athirst, she asked for 
water (poposcit). A certain man named Cyril gave her to drink, 
and by that one cup of cold water purchased the crown of martyr- 
dom. For when Probus the governor understood that he had done 
this for a Christian woman because he was a Christian, he sent him 
to a martyr’s death. 

From these words of Christ some theologians (with Suarez) gather 
as probable, that grace in a just man is increased by remisser acts : 
as if, for example, a just man should have intense degrees of grace, 
say as eight, but should perform an act of almsgiving, by giving, for 
example, a cup of cold water to a poor man in a remiss kind of way 
— say as three — by which act he would nevertheless acquire an aug- 
mentation of his habitual intense grace as eight, by three additional 
grades, so that it would be intensified, or extended as eleven. See 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


NO GOOD WORK WITHOUT REWARD. 


47 


the full discussion of this question in Suarez (Tom. 3 de Gratia , lib. 
9, cap. 3, nu. 36). 

Lastly, Christ here signifies that no work, however small, done to 
a preacher, shall go without its reward. Of this nature are those 
remiss works which just men do in great abundance. And they 
would lose the reward of very many of their works, were it not that 
remiss works increase the more intense grace; for few Christians 
perform acts so intense that they equal, or exceed the habit ; and 
Christ here teaches that they do not lose their reward. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


48 


CHAPTER XL 

2 John sendeth his disciples to Christ 7 Chrisfs testimony concerning John . 
18 The opinion of the people, both concerning John and Christ. 20 Christ 
upbraideth the unthankfulness and unrepentance of Chorazin, Bethsaida , and 
Capernaum. 25 and praising his Father’s wisdom in revealing the gospel to 
the simple. 28 he calleth to him all such as fed the burden of their sms. 

A ND it came to pass, when Jesus had made an end of commanding his twelve 
disciples, he departed then to teach and to preach in their dties. 

2 Now when John had heard in the prison the works of Christ, he sent two of 
his disciples, 

3 And said unto him, Art thou he that should come, or do we look for another? 
4 Jesus answered and said unto them, Go and shew John again those things 
which ye do hear and see : 

5 The blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and 
the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have the gospel preached to 
them. 

6 And blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in me. 

7 if And os they departed, Jesus began to say unto the multitudes concerning 
John, What went ye out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken with the 
wind ? 

8 But what went ye out for to see ? A man clothed in soft raiment ? behold, 
they that wear soft clothing are in kings’ houses. 

9 But what went ye out for to see ? A prophet ? yea, I say unto you, and more 
than a prophet 

10 For this is he, of whom it is written, Behold, I send my messenger before 
thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee. 

11 Verily I say unto you, Among them that are born of women there hath not 
risen a greater than John the Baptist : notwithstanding he that is least in the 
kingdom of heaven is greater than he. 

12 And from the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of heaven 
guffereth violence, and the violent take it by force. 

13 For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John. 

14 And if ye will receive it, this is Elias, which was for to come. 

15 He that hath ears to hear, let him hear. 


Digitized by 


Google 


j 



4 $ 

1 6 ^ fcut whereunto shall I liken this generation ? It is like unto children sitting 
in the markets, and calling unto their fellows, 

17 And saying, We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced 5 we have 
mourned unto you, and ye have not lamented. 

18 For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, He hath a devil. 

19 The Son of man came eating and drinking, and they say, Behold a man 
gluttonous, and a winebibber, a friend of publicans and sinners. But wisdom is 
justified of her children. 

20 U Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein most of his mighty works 
were done, because they repented not : 

21 Woe unto thee, Chorazin ! woe unto thee, Bethsaida ! for if the mighty 
works, which were done in you, had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would 
have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. 

22 But I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the 
day of judgment, than for you. 

23 And thou, Capernaum, which arc exalted unto heaven, shall be brought 
down to hell : for if the mighty works, which have been done in thee, had been 
done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day. 

24 But I say unto you, That it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in 
the day of judgment, than for thee. 

25 H At that time Jesus answered and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of 
heaven and earth, because thou has hid these things from the wise and prudent, 
and hast revealed them unto babes. 

26 Even so, Father : for so it seemed good in thy sight 

27 All things are delivered unto me of my Father : and no man knoweth the 
Son, but the Father ; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he 
to whomsoever the Son will reveal him . 

28 If Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you 
rest. 

29 Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me ; for I am meek and lowly in 
heart : and ye shall find rest unto your souls. 

3P For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light 

And it came to pass, &c. He passed from thence: That means, He 
separated Himself from His Apostles, whom He sent to preach the 
Gospel by themselves, both that they might prepare the way for 
Christ who was about to follow them, and that they might make trial 
of themselves and their courage in this Mission, being separated from 
their Master. What the Apostles did when thus sent forth by Christ, 
S. Matthew is silent upon, but S. Luke relates it (ix. 6 ), and so docs 
S. Mark (vL 12). 

That they should teach and preach in their cities: i.e., in the cities of 
the Jews and the Galileans, to whom He sent them. Note the 
Hebraism here. For the Heb. frequently leaves unexpressed the 
VOL. 11. e 


Digitized by i^.ooQle 





ST. MATTHEW, Xt. 


5 ° 

antecedent of the relative, or demonstrative pronoun, bu* leaves it to 
be understood from the circumstances of the case by the reader or 
hearer. There are similar instances to be found in Psalms xcix. 8, 
2 Kings xvii. 24, &c. 

When John had heard in the prison, Vulg. in chains. When He 
had heard from His disciples , as Luke says (vii. 18), from whence it is 
equally plain that there is here a hysterlogia, and that what S. 
Matthew here relates concerning John, from the 2nd to the 20th 
verse, happened before the Mission of the Apostles, to which he him- 
self referred. 

In chains , Syr. in the house of those who are hound \ that Is when 
Herod had shut him up because he reproved his adultery with 
Herodias. 

John then, a little before his martyrdom, sent these disciples to Christ 
in the thirty-second year of Christ’s age, which was the second year ol 
His preaching, when He was becoming famous by His doctrine and 
miracles, that they might learn from Himself that He was the very 
Messiah, or Christ, that when John was dead they might go to Him. 
For otherwise they might have made a schism from Christ, and pre- 
ferred John as their master to Christ. For that they thought more 
highly of John than of Christ is plain from Matt. ix. 14. As there- 
fore the runners in the Stadium hand on the lamp to the runner who 
succeeds them in the course, so did John — when he had fulfilled his 
office and ministry, resign it to Christ. And, as the dayspring dies 
away into the rising sun, so did John pale before Christ For John 
was the morning star of the sun of righteousness. Wherefore, not 
only did he not envy Christ His rising glory when his own was setting, 
but rejoiced at it Yea, he desired to set, that Christ might arise, 
for he was ambitious not of his own glory, but of God’s and Christ’s 
glory. Wherefore he said, “ It behoveth Him to increase, but me to 
decrease.” 

And saith , &C. He that should come, Gr. 6 ip\ 6 fnvo c, the coming 
one, namely, that great Prophet, the Redeemer of Israel, the Saviour 
of the World, the Messias promised by all the Prophets, and most 
ardently longed for by the Fathers, who at this time, now that the 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


THE PRUDENCE OP THE BAPTIST. 


5 1 


prophecies concerning Him are fulfilled, is by all looked foi as 
coming. He alludes to the prophecy of the Patriarch Jacob, “The 
sceptre shall not be taken away from Judah,” &c. Gen. xlix. 10. 

From these words of John, Tertullian (De Baptism, , c. 10) and 
Justin (Quest. 38 ad Orthodox) think that John doubted concerning 
Jesus whether He were the Christ or not, but falsely, for John had 
already seen the Spirit descending upon Him in the form of a dove, 
and had heard the Father's voice saying, This is my beloved Son. 
And John had already given the clearest testimony to Him, when he 
said, Behold the Lamb of God. 

Others think that John did not doubt whether Jesus were the 
Christ, but only asked whether, after death, He would come into 
Limbus, and visit and deliver the Fathers who were detained there. 
So S. Jerome, “ He did not say, Art Thou He who hast come, but 
art Thou He who wilt come ?. And the meaning is, Tell me, since 
I am about to descend into Hades, whether also I shall announce 
Thee to the shades below, as I have announced Thee in the upper 
world ? Or, is it not fitting that the Son of God should taste of 
death, and wilt Thou send another for these mysteries ?” So, too, 
S. Gregory. But this opinion is little apposite or probable. 

I say, therefore, that John sends his disciples, and asks Jesus 
whether He be the Coming One, the Messias, not as doubting 
about Him, but because, being near death, he wished his hesitating 
disciples to be instructed concerning Him, that they might be led to 
Christ So SS. Hil., Chrys., CyriL Observe, too, the prudence of S. 
John. He in his own name asks Jesus if He be the Christ, because 
his disciples would not, of themselves, have dared to propose such a 
question. For he is the best physician who, to cure a sick man, acts 
as though he were sick himself, and takes nauseous medicine. So 
S. Paul says, “ Who is weak, and I am not weak ? ” 

And Jesus answerings &c. These miracles which ye have seen 
Me perform are the marks of the true Messiah, given by Isai. xxxv. 5, 
and bri. 1. This is why S. Luke adds, In the selfsame hour He healed 
many of their diseases and plagues and evil spirits , and to many that 
were blind He gave sight. For neither Elijah, nor Elisha, nor any 

x a 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



5 * 


S. MATTHEW, XI. 


other prophet did so many and such great miracles as Christ Wheie- 
fore S. Cyril (lib. 2 Thesaur. c. 4) says, “Christ, both by the greatness 
and the multitude of His miracles, shewed Himself to be the Messiah.” 
You may add, by His beneficence. For although Moses shewed 
many miracles in the ten plagues of Egypt, yet did he not heal the 
Egyptians, but afflicted and slew them. But “ Christ went about 
doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil.” Where- 
fore His hands are said to be “versatile” (Cant. v. 14, Vulg.), that is, 
active in doing good to all ; and “full of hyacinths” (Vulg.), ue. 9 of 
heavenly works, miracles and kindnesses. 

The blind see, &c. He alludes to Is. xxxv. 4. “ Our God Himself 
shall come and save us.” (Vulg.) : “then shall the eyes of the blind 
be opened, &c.” Also to Is. lxi. 1. 

The poor have the Gospel preached \ & c. Theophylact and Euthym. 
take the verb tvayye\t(ovrai, actively, meaning, the poor Apostles preach 
the Gospel. But the verb is passive, and so the Syriac translates it 
The meaning is, “ I evangelize the poor, I preach the Gospel to them, 
and they receive it eagerly, though the rich reject it” He alludes to, 
indeed he quotes, Is. lxi. 1, “ He hath sent me to announce to the 
meek,” where the LXX., instead of anavim , the meek, read aniim, the 
poor : and trans., He hath sent me to evangelize the poor , not the poor 
by necessity, but those who are poor in spirit, and consequently, meek 
and gentle. More simply, by the poor, you may understand such as 
the Apostles and the multitudes. For Christ preached to them that 
He might shew that the souls of the poor are equally precious before 
God with those of the rich ; and therefore God made both equal in 
the Gospel Dost thou then wish to imitate Christ? Teach the 
poor, guide, solace, help them. 

And blessed is he, &c., i.e., who shall not be offended at my lowly 
conversation. The Syriac is, Blessed is he who shall not stumble at 
Me. For as S. Greg, says (Horn, vi.), “I do indeed marvellous 
things, but I do not disdain to suffer shameful things.” There is a tacit 
reference to the disciples of John, who were offended at His lowliness; 
and He intimates that he beheld the secrets of their hearts. So S. 
Jerome says, “He aims not at John, but at his disciples.” And S. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


MYSTICAL MEANING OF REED. 


53 


Hilaiy says, “ Because the cross was about to be a stumbling block 
to many, Christ pronounced them blessed to whom His cross, His 
death, His burial, would bring no trial of their faith.” 

And as they were going away . (Gr. and Vulg.) That the multitude 
might not think that Christ was flattering John, and aiming at His 
favour, as S. Chrys. says, if He had praised him in the presence of his 
disciples: therefore He permitted them to depart, and then He 
praised him. 

Jfesus began to say , &c. Shaken , Gr. aa\cv6fuvov 9 waving and 
fluctuating , like a wave of the sea. By a similar metaphor we speak 
of the com waving, when impelled to and fro by the wind. Christ 
would remove any suspicion which might arise among the people from 
this message of John, that he had changed his opinion concerning 
Christ— that whereas he had formerly thought him to be the Messiah, 
he had now changed his opinion, and had sent his disciples to inter- 
rogate Him, because he was in doubt about him. So Jesus, as it were 
said, “Suppose not, O ye Jews, that John thinks any other of Me 
than he thought before. For John is not a reed to be shaken back- 
wards and forwards by the wind, that he should lightly assert a thing, 
and afterwards retract it on account of what men say. John is like 
an oak, which stands unmoved in faith and stedfastness against every 
blast, whether of those who praise or those who blame. What he 
before testified of Me, when he was at liberty, he testifies with equal 
fortitude now that he has been shut up by Herod in prison : and he has 
sent his disciples to Me that they themselves may see by My miracles 
that his testimony concerning Me was true.” 

Tropologically , a reed } is a light man, inconstant, tossed to and fro : 
at one time impelled by the words of flatterers, he asserts something : 
again being driven by detractors, he denies it, as a reed is blown in 
different directions by different winds. 2. A reed is one who is 
devoid of truth, virtue, and consistency, as a reed has no strength, or 
stamina. 3. A reed is he who has no fruit of good works to show, 
since a reed bears no fruit 4. It is he who is delighted with, and 
feeds upon, the fluctuating pleasures of the world. For a reed is dry : 
yet it grows beside the waters. Whence it is called, “ the river reed.” 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



54 


S. MATTHEW, XI. 


On this S. Austin writes piously and elegantly on the words of Ps 
cxxxvii. i. “ Above the rivers of Babylon, there we sat and wept, 
when we remembered Sion.” (Vulg.) “The rivers of Babylon,” he 
says, “are all things which here are loved, and pass away. Sit above 
the rivers ; sit not in the stream, nor under the stream. Behold in 
Babylon there are fair things to detain thee 2 let them not detain thee, 
let them not deceive thee.” 

Hear S. Greg. (Horn. vL in Evang.) “ What else but the carnal 
mind is signified by the reed ? But such was not John, for favour 
could not flatter him, nor could the anger of any detraction make him 
harsh. 

Hear also S. Ambrose (Jib. 5 in c. 7 Luc. v. 24)2 “The Lord 
denies that we must go forth into the desert —that is, into the world 
— lest we should think those are to be imitated by us who are of a 
carnal mind, whom, being obnoxious to the storms of this world, an 
unsettled life disquiets ; who are rightly compared to a reed, in whom 
is no solid fruit of justice, men with their Lng hair, with forensic 
trappings, implicated in knotty points, sonorous with empty mouth* 
ings, with no benefit to themselves, but often with harm, follow after 
things inwardly worthless, outwardly specious. We are reeds when 
we are not rooted with any natural strength. If any light gale of 
prosperity blow upon us, we beat our neighbours with idle motion 2 
we are useless to help, facile to injure. Reeds love rivers, as the 
fading and transitory things of the world delight us. If, however, 
anyone shall pluck up this reed from the earth, and strip off its 
useless parts — spoiling the old man with his deeds — and guide it by 
the hand of a scribe writing quickly, it begins to be no more a reed, 
but a pen, which impresses the precepts of the heavenly Scriptures 
on the hidden places of the mind, and writes them on the tables of 
the heart” 

Afterwards S. Ambrose adds, that Christ is the good reed of whom 
Isaiah prophesied (c. xlii.) — “A shaken reed he will not break” 
(Vulg.) — because the flesh which sins had shaken He made firm by 
the power of the Resurrection. The good reed is the Flesh of Christ, 
which nailed the serpent's head, and the enticements of worldly 
cupidity, to the gibbet of the Cross. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


THE BAPTIST CALLED AN ANGEL. 


55 


But what went ye out, &c. But John is not soft and delicate. He 
is not clothed in palatial garments, but in sackcloth of camels’ hair. 
For pleasures are the mistresses of flattery and lies, but hardness is 
* the teacher of truth and sanctity. 

But what went ye out for to seel More than a prophet. Syriac, 
one more excellent than a prophet. You may object that John him- 
self denied that he was a prophet (Jo. L 21). I reply, He said that 
out of humility, but in a true sense. For a prophet is, strictly 
speaking, one who foretells future events. But John did not foretell of 
Christ as about to come, but pointed to Him as present He was 
therefore, rather the finger-post, as it were, than the prophet of Christ, 
and therefore Christ said that he was more than a prophet In the 
next place, he, through the Divine Spirit, illustrated Christ, and knew 
the economy of Christ in the Flesh more clearly, fully, and perfectly 
than any of the prophets. 3. John was the angel, that is, the ambas- 
sador and precursor of Christ Himself, and immediately sent by 
Him, and that in His presence and before His face, according to the 
words of Maiachi : “ Behold I send My angel before Thy face, wno 
shall prepare Thy way before Thee.” (Vulg.) 4. He himself was 
altogether greater than all the prophets, as Christ asserts, verse 11. 

For this is he of whom, &c. Christ cites the words of Maiachi iii, 
1. See what I have there said. I have there collected the reasons 
and analogies why John is called an angeL And many indeed 
thought that he was not really 1 man, but an angel, as Eusebius 
shews (lib. 1, Demonst. c. 5). hence Auctor Imperfecti on this 
place says, “ Marvellous was he who surpassed in human nature the 
sanctity of angels, and by the grace of God obtained what by nature 
he had not” 

Verily I say unto you, &c. Luke adds the word prophet (vil 27) : 
There hath not arisen a greater prophet. Whence Toletus from SS. 
Ambrose and Hilary observes that Jesus does not use the word 
greater of John absolutely, but as restricted by the word prophet. 
For the Apostles were greater, or certainly in every way the equals o* 
John. But, on the contrary, I should say that by the expression 
Prophet, Christ leaves it to be understood that there had been no 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


S. MATTHEW, XI. 


$6 

person who was greater than John, for the prophets were accounted 
in the olden time, and really were, the most holy of men. So that 
as none of the prophets were greater than John, it may be gathered 
that there was no one else who was greater. 

Christ therefore tacitly here calls John the greatest of all men, for 
otherwise He would not conclude from thence that he was more than a 
prophet , which He proceeds to prove. This must be understood of 
the worthies of the Old Testament — that is to say, of all time prior 
to Christ John, therefore, is not here compared with Christ Him- 
self, or the Blessed Virgin, or the Apostles, who followed Christ and 
who (by reason of their Apostolic dignity) were not less than John, 
but rather indeed greater than he. You may say that Moses was 
greater than John, because it was said of him (Deut xxxiv. n), 
“ And there arose not a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses.” 
I reply, that it goes on, “ Whom the Lord knew face to face, in all 
the signs and the wonders which the Lord sent him to do in the land 
of Egypt” Which means, that there was no prophet like unto 
Moses in his familiar converse with God, and the power by which he 
smote Egypt with plagues. But in other things John was equal with, 
yea greater than, Moses and the rest of the prophets. 

Besides other distinguishing characteristics and prerogatives of 
John, his spirit, prophetic office, life, and actions were more sublime 
than those of the other prophets, a3 S. Jerome asserts, and S. Austin 
(lid. a, contr. advers . leg. et proph. c. 5). For John was, as it were, a 
standing miracle in his conception, in the womb, in his birth, in his 
angelic life. He was conceived, by a miracle, of barren parents ; 
by a miracle he recognized Christ in the womb ; and saluted and 
adored him ; by a miracle, when he was bom he communicated 
universal gladness; by a miracle, at his circumcision he restored 
the use of speech to his dumb father ; by a miracle, he went when a 
boy into the desert, and there lived like an angel all his life. Whence 

the Church sings of John — 

O boundlessly happy, of merit most lofty, 

Of purity snow-white, pollution thou h&test: 

O martyr most valiant, of deserts the lover. 

Of seers the greatest 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



MEANING OF “ GREATEST ” AND “ LEAST.* 57 

And so John has the crowns of virginity, prophecy, and martyrdom, 
in addition to the crown of a doctor. 

But he that is leasts &c i. The least of the blessed in heaven is 
greater, that is, more blessed and more perfect, more excellent and 
glorious than John, who was still a mortal traveller. Christ adds 
these words that He may stir up His hearers to follow after the 
blessedness of His salvation by means of the evangelic law which He 
himself brought in. For this is the Kingdom of Heaven from which 
Christ began and continued His preaching. 

a. With greater propriety and force, you may say with S. Chrysostom 
and others, that Christ here opposes, and in one sense places Him- 
self lower than John, but in other respects prefers Himself to John. 
He says, “I have declared that among those born of women there is 
not a greater in the Old Testament than John ; but lest ye should 
think that he is the greatest of all, and the Messias, I add, that 
Christ, who is younger than John, is, nevertheless, greater than he.” 
It is as though Christ said, “I, Christ, who in age, and in the opinion 
of the common people, am less than John in preaching, in the 
kingdom of Heaven am greater than he, because I so preach that I 
at the same time inspire grace, by which believers in Me may indeed 
attain this kingdom.” Whence it seems that a comma should be 
placed after the word least \ not after kingdom of heaven. In the Gr. 
Christ is here called b puepbrepoc, i.e., less than, junior to John. The 
Heb. would be kaccaton, or the little one, that is to say, the least, the 
loivliest, as Christ was when He said, “As for me, I am a worm and 
no man, the very scorn of men, and the outcast of the people.” The 
comparative is often put for the superlative. 

3. Our Maldonatus explains thus: The less, that is, the least 
Christian in the kingdom of Heaven, or the Church, which preaches 
and leads to the kingdom of Heaven is greater, that is, of higher 
dignity than John. Greater, I say, by reason of the status of the 
Church ; and he is able to be greater from the nature of the Gospel, 
than John was. For the new law of Christ is the law of grace, 
which we are always able to increase. Whence John the Baptist and 
all the old fathers received their grace from Christ and the new law. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


S. MATTHEW, XI. 


58 

Symbolically , S. Caesarius says (dialog. 3), “ The least, or the 
youngest of the Apostles was John the Evangelist, who is greater than 
John the Baptist, because the Apostle leant upon the bosom of 
Christ.” 

From the days of John the Baptist, \ &c. This pertains to the praise 
of John, and shews that he was more than a prophet, because he first 
began to preach the kingdom of heaven. And so efficacious was 
his preaching joined to his holy life, that many who were baptised by 
him repented, and changed their course of life, and with great zeal 
strove for the kingdom of heaven. And now, I succeeding to John, 
promote this zeal by Myself and My Apostles, yea and will more and 
more promote it 

Wherefore the kingdom of heaven now (/?«££erai, i.e.) suffers force , is 
invaded \ is seized by force. 1. Because men m vast multitudes, being 
stirred up by the preaching of John run to obtain it with zeal, with 
avidity, one pushing before another, as though it were some rare 
merchandise. 

2. Because the kingdom is now compassed by all, not by natural 
instinct, as the Jews would maintain, but by the supernatural power 
of grace. The kingdom is, as it were, invaded, in such sort that 
sinners, publicans, harlots, Gentiles, by the fervour of their repentance^ 
take it beforehand, as it were, seize it by force, away from the Phari- 
sees and Jews, who thought that it belonged to them alone as the 
children of Abraham. It is as though He said, the Pharisees and 
Christians contend for the kingdom of Heaven, but the Christians 
seize it from the Pharisees by force. Whence SS. Hilary and Amb. 
say, “ Christ is seized, since He, born among one sort of people, is 
chosen by others.” Amb. adds, " The Church has taken away the 
kingdom from the synagogue. Christ is my kingdom. The kingdom 
of Heaven is taken by force when Christ is denied by those of His 
own household, and is worshipped by the Gentiles. He is taken by 
force when he is rejected by the former, but cherished by the latter.” 

3. Because for the kingdom of Heaven’s sake worldly men do 
violence to themselves by the cultivation of repentance, poverty, con- 
tinence, mortification. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


BEAUTIFUL WORDS 07 8. AMBROSE. $9 

In the lives of the Fathers there is related the vision of a certain 
anchorite who beheld that a disciple of his merited seven crowns in 
Heaven in a single night, because he had seven times bravely with- 
stood evil thoughts. By this he perceived that as often as any one 
struggles against sinful thoughts and desires he merits a crown from 
God. For it is written, The kingdom of heaven suffereth violence , and 
the violent take it by force . 

Beautifully does S. Ambrose comment on this passage, “ We do 
violence to the Lord, not by compelling Him, but by weeping before 
Him, not t>y provoking by injuries, but by entreating with tears ; not 
by blaspheming through pride, but by sorrowing through humility. O 
blessed violence which is not chastised with indignation, but is con- 
doned in mercy — blessed violence, I say, which draws forth the good- 
ness of Him who suffers the violence, and contributes to the profit 
of him who uses violence. An evil thing is done, and no one is 
blamed : violence is suffered, and religion is advanced. Whosoever 
shall do most violence to Christ shall be accounted most religious by 
Christ We come upon the Lord in the way, for indeed He is the 
way, and after the manner of robbers, we endeavour to spoil Him of 
what is His. We desire to take His kingdom, His riches and His life. 
And He is so rich and so liberal that he does not resist He does 
not deny, and after He has given all, He still possesses all.” After- 
wards he speaks of the manner and the weapons of this violence, 
saying, “ We attack him, not with swords, nor staves, nor stones, but 
with meekness, good works, chastity. These are the weapons of our 
faith, by which we strive in our contest But in order that we may 
be able to make use of these arms in doing violence, let us first use 
a certain violence to our own bodies, let us carry by storm the vices 
of our members, that we may obtain the rewards of valour. For to 
seize the Saviour’s kingdom we must first reign in ourselves.” 

And the violent \ &c. Those who invade the kingdom of Heaven in 
the sense in which I have just spoken. He alludes to an opulent 
city set upon a mountain, which must be stormed by great force, 
which is in fact stormed by soldiers who covet its riches. He alludes 
especially to the kingdom of Canaan, or the Promised Land, which 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


6o 


8. MATTHEW, XI. 

the Hebrews under Joshua conquered by force of arms. This was a 
type of the kingdom of Heaven. In like manner Heaven is to be 
won by the sons of earth climbing up on high by their heavenly con- 
versation. The empyrean sky is so lofty, so far above the earth, that 
were any one to live for 8000 years, and were every day to climb in 
perpendicular height a hundred thousand miles, yet would he not 
reach the top, as I have shewn on Gen. ii. 16. And because this is 
impossible to mortals, God has granted that what we cannot climb with 
corporeal feet we should reach by the affections of our minds. 

In the life of S. Perpetua and her fellow-martyrs, we read that she 
was forewarned of her martyrdon in a dream. She beheld a golden 
ladder reaching from earth to heaven, which was hedged in and sur- 
rounded on all sides by knives and sharp swords. By this ladder they 
had to climb up to heaven. At its foot lay a horrible dragon who 
sought to hinder the climbers. She saw moreover one of her com- 
panions, Satyrus by name, bravely mounting the ladder, and inviting 
his companions to follow him. When she had related her vision they 
all understood that they were to suffer martyrdom. And so indeed 
it befelL Thus let each believer consider that with his utmost energy 
he must struggle up to Heaven by means of a ladder hedged about 
with knives. 

For all the Prophets and the Law prophesied ’ &c. This sentence is 
expressed more clearly in Luc. xvi. 16 — The Law and the Prophets 
(#>., prophesied), until John: since that time the Kingdom of God is 
preached and every one uses violence to it. (Vulg.) The Law of Moses and 
all the Prophets prophesied up to the time of John : ue n darkly and by 
enigmas they foretold and promised Christ and His heavenly king- 
dom, by promising terrestial good things, such as abundance of corn 
and wine and oil, and a rich and peaceful earthly kingdom like 
that of Solomon, which was a figure and a type of the celestial king- 
dom to be brought in by Christ But John was the first who clearly 
and openly began to preach this heavenly kingdom of Christ, and 
to point out Christ as it were with his finger to the Jews. 

Again the Old Testament which consists of the Law, or Pentateuch, 
and the Prophets, under which are the Hagiographical books, such as 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


JOHN THE MORNING STAR. 6l 

the Psalms, prophesied until John, that is, they taught the ignorant Jews 
not so much to love as to fear God, by the hope of temporal rewards, 
and to worship Him by means of sacrifices, and external rites and 
ceremonies, which were shadows and types of Christ But John 
began to preach the new doctrines of repentance and the love of God, 
through hope in the kingdom of Heaven, and of obtaining celestial 
good things by means of internal acts of contrition, piety, and the 
worship of God, by which we are truly and perfectly justified through 
Christ 

Christ here compares and parallels prophecy with prophecy, le ., the 
doctrine of John’s prophecy with the doctrine of the Law and the 
Prophets. For John was a mean between the Old and New Testa- 
ments, as it were the horizon of both, dividing and determining the New 
from the Old, as Salmeron says. He was the morning star of the 
Gospel who put an end to the shadows and the obscure night of the 
old Law, and ushered in the clear day of the new Law. 

And if ye will receive if, this is Elias , &c. That is if ye wish to 
receive John, and to believe him, as ye ought to do. Whence the 
Syriac translates by the imperative — If ye wish, receive ye. For he 
shall be Elias unto you, because he being endowed with the spirit and 
power of Elias, shall convert you to God and Christ, in the same way 
that Elias shall convert your children and descendants at the end of 
the world by a like zeal and purity of life to the same Christ Thus 
S. Jerome says, “John is Elias which is for to come, not because the 
same soul was in both, as the heretics think, but because they had 
the same grace of the Holy Spirit John was girded as Elias was. 
Like Elias he lived in the desert. He suffered from Herodias as 
Elias did from Jezebel. And as Elias shall be the precursor of the 
Second Advent, so was John of the Lord when He came in the 
flesh to save us.” 

There is a reference to Mai. iv. 5, M Behold I will send you Elijah 
the prophet” The Jews even to this day are eagerly expecting Elias 
from this prophecy of Malachi, that he may shew Christ unto them, 
and explain all the doubtful matters of the Law ; and therefore they 
hold him in great account This was why Christ compared and 
equalled John to him. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


62 


S. MATTHEW, XI. 


He that hath ears to hear . Gr. of hearing, />., to understand and 
obey. The Arabic has, hearing ears . For the Heb., which has a 
deficiency of compound words, uses simple in the place of compound 
words, as hear instead of obey . The meaning is, He that hath a 
teachable and obedient mind, let him hear, understand and obey the 
things which I say, namely, let him believe John to be a prophet and 
more than a prophet, when he declares that I am the Messiah, and 
henceforth let him receive and worship Me as the Son of God and 
the Saviour of the world. There is special reference to Christ’s 
declaration that John is Elias. For this is mystical, and requires 
intelligence, as S. Jerome says. Christ was wont by this phrase to 
rouse the attention of His hearers to important subjects. 

To what shall I liken, &c. This generation means the Scribes* 
and Pharisees, who despised the counsel of God and the preaching 
and baptism of John. 

They are like unto boys, &c. There was in that age, says Theophy- 
lact on the seventh chapter of S. Luke, and S. Cyril, a game of this 
description. Boys divided themselves into two parties, and made as 
it were two choirs. Thus they represented human life on a sort of 
stage. One party, like Heraclitus, were always lamenting ; the other 
side were always, like Democritus, laughing at it. By the one set all 
that we do was made the food for lamentation, by the other for jokes. 
They of the one choir kept wailing, those opposite to them played 
on pipes ; but the choir which was wailing took no notice of the 
opposite choir, which was singing, neither, on the other hand, did 
the pipe-players take any notice of the mourners. And the lookers 
on heard like spectators at a comedy, but were neither moved by the 
wailing nor the dancing. 

The meaning of the parable is plain from what follows. It is 
this : as though Christ said, “ You may perceive in this generation 
of the Scribes and Pharisees something similar to the boyish games, 
as concerns the spectators who look on at their ease. For they 
cannot be induced to change their life and be converted, either by 
the example of tne austere life of John, or by the less stem life of 
Christ” He likens the parable, as a whole, to the whole thing 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



SPIRITUAL DANCING. 


63 


signified by it, and not a part to a part Elegantly and wisely says 
S. Ambrose (lib. 2, de Penitentia ) — Not that dancing which is the 
companion of pleasures and luxuries is here spoken o£ but that 
whereby a man lifts himself on high, nor suffers the members to drag 
lazily along the ground. Thus S. Paul danced spiritually, when for 
our sakes he stretched himself out, and forgetting the things which 
were behind, and reaching forth unto those which were before, he 
strove for the prize of Christ. Thou likewise, when thou comest to 
baptism, be admonished to lift up thine hands, and to have feet that 
are swift to mount to things eternal. Dancing like this is the 
associate of faith, the companion of grace. This, then, is the 
mystery. We have sung unto you, as it were, the song of the New 
Testament, and ye have not danced — that is, ye have not lifted up 
your minds unto heavenly grace. We have lamented, and ye have 
not wept, i>., ye have not repented. There is an allusion to Ezek. 
xxxiii. 32 : “ Thou art unto them as a song of music which is 
very sweetly sung. And they hear thy words, but they will not do 
them.” 

Allegorically , S. Ambrose (lib. 4, Epist. 30), “ The Son of God 
hath said, * We have sung unto you, and ye have not danced/ &c. 
The Jews who did not dance were forsaken. They knew not how to 
clap their hands. The Gentiles were called, who gave spiritual 
praise to God. Here is the glorious dancing of the wise, the dance 
which David danced. Therefore, in the sublimity of his spiritual 
dancing, he ascended to the throne of Christ, that he might hear and 
see the Lord saying to his Lord, * Sit thou at My right hand/” 

For John came neither eating, &c. That is to say, not eating, or 
living in pleasure, like other men, but living austerely, fasting, and 
feeding on locusts ; that by this means he might arouse the Scribes 
to compunction, and affright them. Yet the Scribes say of him, He 
hath a devil. The Arabic has, da ils are with him. That is, John 
was possessed by a devil, by whose power and energy he was sus- 
tained, so as to be able to lead so rigorous a life. Thus, the very 
austerity of John, which for their sakes be bad lived, since from his 
purity and innocence it was not needed for his own sake, they attri- 


Digitized by C^ooQle 



64 S. MATTHEW, XI. 

buted to a demon. Such was their extraordinary ingratitude and 
wickedness. 

Observe then, how Christ applies this parable. John’s austere life 
is signified by the troop of boys lamenting. But Christ living less 
austerely, and conversing with the world more familiarly, is denoted 
by the chorus ot boys who piped. The Scribes and Pharisees 
laughed at, derided both of them, because they wished to be free 
from any reprover of their pleasures and licentious mode of life. 

The Son of Man came eating \ &c. (at a common table, living after 
the manner of ordinary men, and conversing familiarly with them), 
And they say (i.e., the Scribes and Pharisees in their obstinate wicked- 
ness), Behold a gluttonous man , &c. 

John led an austere life in the desert, Christ led the ordinary life 
of men, that His affability might allure those whom John's austerity 
would terrify. For Christ came into this world in order that he 
might afford to all men a perfect example of humility and every 
other virtue, an example which every one might imitate in their 
several ranks and stations. But especially did He come that sinners 
might be converted from their sins to God. Wherefore it was neces- 
sary that He should converse with them, eat and drink with them, 
and thus draw them to love and follow Him. So S. Thomas. S. 
Aug. gives another reason (Lib. 3, de Doctr. Christ c. 12). It was, 
that Christ might show in all such things, namely, food, drink, cloth- 
ing, &c., that it is not the things themselves, but the inordinate love 
of using them, which is in fault And so He taught that rich men 
may live religiously in their riches, and be saved. 

But wisdom is justified of her sons. Syr. of her servants . To justify 
is used in two senses, viz., to make just and to declare just The 
wisdom of God fa justified, i.e., fa pronounced and declared just, un- 
blameable, fully and entirely perfect, as she manifested herself in 
lohn and Christ, because she left nothing untried that would conduce 
to the salvation of men. That they might have a pattern of an 
austere life and penance, she gave them John. Again, lest many 
should be terrified by this austerity, and despair of virtue and salva- 
tion, she gave them in Christ an example of ordinary life and virtue. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


HOW WISDOM IS JUSTIFIED. 


65 

Of her children, namely, those who were desirous of virtue and 
wisdom, such as those who believed in Christ, and who heard and 
obeyed John. Therefore, the wisdom of God, which the proud 
Scribes and the foolish Jews despised in John and Christ, was justi- 
fied, i.e. t honoured and praised by all the truly wise. If, therefore, 
any perish, they perish by their own fault, because they will not 
believe and obey John and Christ Thus they may impute their 
ruin to themselves, and justify God, according to the words of Ps. li. 
tX That Thou mayst be justified in Thy sayings, and overcome when 
Thou art judged. In a similar sense, the Apostle says to Timothy 
(l Tim. iil), “ Great is the sacrament of piety, which was manifested 
in the flesh, justified in the spirit” (Vulg.) f was declared and 
shown to the world to be just, holy and wise, and that the work and 
mystery of the incarnation of the Word was worthy of God. That 
this is the meaning is plain from Luke vii. 29, who thus relates the 
occasion of this parable, and by means of the preamble, as it were, 
sets forth the scope and intention of the parable. u And all the 
people and the publicans who heard him, justified God, being 
baptized with the baptism of John. But the Pharisees and the 
lawyers despised the counsel of God against themselves, not being 
baptized of him.” And presently He subjoins the parable of the 
boys piping and lamenting, as I have already expounded it 

S. Aug. (lib. 2 de doctr. Christ.) expounds the passage as follows : 
Wisdom is justified of her own sons , because “ the holy Apostles per- 
ceived that the kingdom of God did not consist in meat and drink, 
but in the equanimity of endurance, forasmuch as they were such as 
neither abundance lifted up, nor want depressed.” 

Lastly, S. Jerome in this passage, and S. Ambrose, remark that 
various Gr. codices read Wisdom is justified by her works. Because, 
says S. Jerome, “wisdom seeks not the testimony of the mouth, but 
of deeds.” 

Then began He to upbraid, &c. Then namely, when He sent the 
Apostles to preach throughout Galilee, and He preached by Himself, 
though with little fruit and few conversions. He began to upbraid the 
extreme ingratitude and obstinate wickedness of these cities, viz , 
VOL. il * 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


i 


66 


S. MATTHEW, XI. 


those in which most of His mighty works, i.e., His miracles, were 
done. These were the miracles by which He confirmed His teaching. 
And He upbraided the cities because after so many miracles, and so 
many exhortations, so many threats of hell, so many promises of the 
Kingdom of Heaven, they had not repented. 

Woe unto thee, Chorazin , &c. Chorazin was a renowned city of 
Galilee, which was numbered amongst the ten more celebrated towns 
of Decapolis. It was situated over against Capernaum, on the Sea of 
Galilee, where the Jordan flows into it. It was about two miles distant 
from Capernaum. Wherefore Christ, who had fixed his home and 
settled abode at Capernaum, frequently made excursions to preach in 
Chorazin and Bethsaida, and the neighbouring towns. Chorazin, or 
Cozorain in Chaldee, is the same as Co, Le., here, and raya, Le., a 
secret. Appropriately, because Christ here preached the arcana , or 
secrets of the faith. S. Jerome, in his work on Hebrew places, 
testifies that in his time Corozain, as it is spelt in the Vulgate, was 
deserted. There are still some ancient ruins remaining on its site. 
Some persons are of opinion that Antichrist will be bom at Chorazin, 
and brought up there, though others think he will be bom in Babylon, 
according to the words of Jeremiah (cap. i.), “ From Babylon shall all 
evil be opened out” But both these opinions are extremely doubtful 

Bethsaida : Bethsaida also was one of the chief cities of Galilee, 
adjacent to the sea, and distant from Capernaum about three hours’ 
journey. It received its name from being inhabited by fishermen. 
Beth means a house, and saida is fishing, Tix sud in Heb. means to 
hunt, but in Syriac to fish, because fishing is hunting in the sea, 
whence saida means fishermen. So Franc. Lucas. It is probable 
that the home of Peter and Andrew was in this city, where Christ 
healed Peter’s mother in law, who was sick of a fever. But see what I 
have said on viii. 14. Here, also, Christ placed spittle in the eyes of a 
certain blind man, and restored him to perfect sight (see Mark, c. viii) 
Wherefore, Christ deservedly upbraids Bethsaida, because, though 
its people had seen so many miracles of His, they did not believe 
in Him. And so he threatens it with destruction, future as well as 
present ; and this really happened to them. For this city formerly so 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



pod’s absolute foreknowledge. 


67 


abounding in prosperity, and so populous, is so deserted that it scarcely 
contains six houses. (See Adrichomius, Descrip. Term Sand. p. 137.) 

For if the mighty works had been done in Tyre, &c. We must 
understand, if the inward grace of God had accompanied the outward 
miracles : that is to say, if there had been an illumination of the 
understanding, and an influencing of the will, agreeable and propor- 
tionable to those, such as God is wont ordinarily to give. For with- 
out inward grace to influence the mind, all outward preaching is vain 
and worthless. 

They would long ago have repented, &c. Theologians gather from 
this passage that God knows certainly conditional events, which 
depend on free will, even although those events will never happen, 
forasmuch as the condition does not exist in the nature of things. 
Christ here asserts positively that the Tyrians and Sidonians 
would have repented if they had seen the miracles of Christ, 
yet they did not see these miracles, and consequently did 
not repent The reason d priori is, the infinite nature of the 
Divine Mind, the immeasurable scope and activity of the Divine 
understanding, which wholly comprehends, penetrates and perfectly 
beholds all things, even those that are the most secret, and what is 
called the liberty of man, and his free thoughts and volitions. There- 
fore it is omniscient, and nothing is able to escape it, so that it should 
not thoroughly behold and perceive it. For the object of the Divine 
omniscience is all truth, past, present, and future, and that either con- 
ditional or absolute. In future conditional events, one half of a 
contradiction is true, as in absolute propositions. For with the con- 
dition, that which is said will either be, or will not be. See what I have 
said on Jer. xxxviii. 17., also on Wisdom iv. 11. on the words, “ He 
was taken away, lest wickedness should change his understanding.” 

Again, S. Aug. (lib. de bono perseveran. caps. 9 and 10), refutes by 
means of this passage the Semipelagians who said that God predes- 
tinates such and such men, because He foresees they will use well 
grace, if it be given them. For the Tyrians would have used grace 
well, if it had been given, yet it was not given. 

Lastly, from this place do not gather that to the Tyrians was 

F 2 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


68 8. MATTHEW, XI. 

wanting sufficient grace, but such copious and abundant grace as the 
Galilseans had. 

Verily I say unto you 9 it shall he more tolerable : Arabic, there shall 
be greater remission for Tyre , &c. For the Tyrians and Sidonians shall 
be punished on account of their own wickednesses, but you, O ye 
Galilaeans shall be more severely punished : i. Because ye had 
greater knowledge of God’s law, and virtue. 2. Because ye have 
often heard Me preaching and exhorting to repentance, and have 
beheld Me doing many miracles, none of which things the Tyrians 
have either seen or heard. 

Moraliter: In like manner, Christians shall be more heavily 
punished in the day of judgment than the Jews; the citizens of Rome, 
than the inhabitants of India ; priests, than laymen ; religious, than 
seculars, if the former classes have lived sinful lives; forasmuch as they 
have received greater degrees of grace and knowledge from God, and 
would not make use of them, but abused them to their own greater 
damnation. 

And thou , Capemaum 9 &c. Thou, which art exalted through M> 
miracles and doctrine and preaching, rather than by thy merchandise 
and thy wealth, and who hast been made glorious and famous with God 
and man, shalt thou, I say, be always exalted ? Not so : but in the day 
of judgment thou shalt be thrust down to hell : Thou shalt descend 
into its lowest pit ; that beneath the Tyrians and Sidonians who have 
sinned less than thou hast, thou mayst abide in the very centre ol 
Gehenna, and there mayest feel more than others its fiery burnings. 
Thou shalt be tormented and burnt up, because very many of thy 
citizens shall be cast into hell Hence S. Aug. (Serm. 42 de Sane.) 
explains exalted \ as follows : “ Forasmuch as thou seemest to thyself 
to be very happy, very powerful, very proud, and so dost despise Me, 
and all who admonish thee, this is the very cause why thou rushest on 
thine own destruction. 11 

For if the mighty works which have been done in thee had 
been done in Sodom 9 it would perchanee 9 as the Vulg. here hath 
it : (forte) &c. But this word forte 9 peradventure 9 or perchance 9 does 
not in this place denote doubt, or hesitation. It represents the hv of 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



EXACT FORCE OF THE GR. av IN VER. 23. 69 

the Gr. text, av is here an expletive, or a particle expressing confir- 
mation, and signifies, certainly , verily. The translation omits to render 
hr in v. 21., and various other passages, where it is found in the 
Greek. Indeed av is only translated forte 9 perhaps , in four places, 
viz., here; in John v. 46 ; in Ps. lxxxl 15 ; and in 2 Cor. vil 5. In 
all the other passages, which are very numerous, in which hv occurs in 
the Greek, it is not translated in the Vulgate, but the passage is 
rendered affirmatively, as in Matt iii. 18, v. 18, vi. 5, x. 12, and very 
many other places, as you may perceive from a Greek Concordance. 
This is the reason why Vatablus and others omit the perchance in this 
passage, and trans. simply, it would have remained. The perchance 
does not mean that Christ had any doubt about Sodom’s remaining 
but that although it certainly would have remained, yet this remaining 
would have been free, ix. of its own free will, therefore the word hv 
denotes that he foresaw what would have happened, as it were 
fortuitously. Thus Terence says in the Andria , “ Perchance I 
behold a soldier: I approach the man.” Also Livy {lib. 1.), 
u Perchance it fell out” The meaning therefore is, If the Sodomites 
had heard My preaching, and had beheld as many miracles, as 
you have, O ye inhabitants of Capernaum, in confirmation of that 
preaching, verily they would have felt compunction and would have 
repented, and would have remained until this veiy day. Understand ; 
unless they themselves or their descendants had after their repentance 
again relapsed into the same, or similar sins, and had again provoked 
the anger of God to bring upon them a like destruction. But if they 
had continued in their repentance and change of life, they would 
have remained until this day. All this is intimated by the word, 
perchance, here. And this is why Franc. Lucas renders dr ipeivav by 
the potential mood, they might have remained. 

Verily I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable: Arabic, it shall find 
greater forgiveness : Syriac, they shall be more tranquil. 

At that time Jesus answered and said, &c. What Christ now 
says, agrees well with what has gone before, for Christ here gives 
the reason why the Capemaites, the Scribes, the priests, and the 
Pharisees, despised Him, and His preaching, because, in truth, they 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


70 


S. MATTHEW, XI. 


were proud, and seemed, in their own eyes, wise and prudent 
Wherefore they would not bend their proud necks to the humility of 
Christ and the Gospel, but the Apostles and the disciples and the 
multitude did bow their necks. This sentence also expresses that 
Christ soothed the grief which He felt because of their proud in- 
credulity by a consideration of, and complacency in, the just judg- 
ment and the Divine decree, whereby God hid these things from the 
proud as unworthy of them, and revealed them to little ones, /.a, to 
the lowly. Whence Luke adds. He exulted in the Holy Spirit 
(Vulg.) £*., He rejoiced through the Holy Ghost, which had sug- 
gested to Him this consideration, and the joy which arose out of it 
Therefore he praised and thanked God. We too can do as Christ 
did, that when we lose our labour with the proud and the unworthy, 
we may quell our grief by considering the Divine Will and Provi- 
dence, which despises the proud, and chooses the humble, and lifts 
them to His grace and glory. 

I confess (Vulg). That is, I praise and give thanks. This is the 
meaning of the Heb. rr, yada, in Hiphil, viz., rmn, hoda, from 
which comes rmn, a sacrifice , viz., of confession^ of praise, and 
giving thanks. Thus, too, we constantly find in the Psalms such 
expressions as, “ I will confess to Thee with my whole heart,” I 
will praise Thee; and, “Confess to the Lord, for He is good,” 
i>., praise the Lord. 

To Thee 9 O Father , who lovest Me with a peculiar love, and who 
disposest all things to Thy and My glory. He adds this lest any one 
should attribute it to want of power in Christ that He did not 
subdue to Him the proud Capemaites and Pharisees. It is as 
though He had said, “ Thou, O my Father, forasmuch as Thou art 
Lord of Heaven and earth, hast the hearts of all men in Thy hands, 
and couldst bend them by a single nod, and subdue them before 
Me, but this, by Thine holy ordinance, Thou wouldst not do.” 

Moreover, under the name of Heaven and earth, all creatures — all 
men and angels are signified. By which it is intimated — i. That 
God has care for and rules, and calls to the grace of the Gospel and 
salvation by Christ, not the Jews only, but the Gentiles also. 2. That 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



INPANTS ELOQUENT. 


71 


God is drawing His faithful ones from earth to Heaven, inasmuch 
as He is Lord of Heaven equally with earth, and therefore opens 
heaven to His friends. 3. That in like manner as God has separated 
the lowly Apostles from the proud Pharisees on earth, so in like 
manner has He separated the humble angels from proud Lucifer and 
his adherents in heaven. 

Listen to Tertullian (lib. i 9 contra , Marc. c. 13) : “ There is the fulness 
of the Deity itself setting forth perfect God, Father and Lord, Father 
by clemency, Lord by discipline, Father by sweet power, Lord by 
severity : a Father to be affectionately loved, a Lord to be neces- 
sarily feared : to be loved because He prefers mercy before sacrifice ; 
to be feared because He will not tolerate sin : to be loved because 
He prefers the repentance to the death of a sinner; to be feared 
because He will not accept sinners who do not repent Therefore, 
the Law prescribes both : thou shalt love God, and thou shalt fear 
God. He proposes the one to him who follows Him, the other to 
him who goes astray from Him.” 

And hast revealed them unto babes , Gr. kijWoic, or infants. 
So the Arabic, meaning to ignorant, unskilled, and uneloquent men 
(such as the Apostles, who seemed to the Scribes and worldly persons 
to be rude, and as foolish as children), in order that Thou mayest 
exhibit in them the power of Thy grace and Thy light, by which 
Thou hast made the tongues of these infants eloquent, so that their 
sound is gone out into all the earth, and their words unto the ends 
of the world. There is an allusion to Ps. viil 3 : “Out of the 
mouths of babes and sucklings Thou hast perfected praise, that 
Thou mightest destroy the enemy and the avenger.” For the elec- 
tion and disposition of God are clean contrary to the world. Jgor 
the world courts and chooses the rich, the wise, the proud. God 
chooses the poor, the ignorant, the weak ; and He makes them rich, 
wise, and powerful in spirit above all the worldly. 

From this passage, S. Augustine (de preedest. Sand. c. 6, et de 
Bono Perseveran. c. 8), and S. Gregory (25 Moral, c. 13) teach, that 
when some believe the preached Gospel and others believe not, it is the 
effect of the grace and justice of God. For they who believe are so 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


72 


S. MATTHEW, XI. 


congruously illuminated in their minds by the grace of God, that 
they do believe; but they who believe not, on account of their 
pride and other sins, are not so congruously illuminated by God, 
that they do, in fact, believe ; although if they would consent to, 
and cooperate with, the illumination which God affords them, they 
could believe, and in truth would believe. 

Even so Father , &c. The Gr. is vaX 6 Dan/p, for the Greeks often 
use the nominative for the vocative. The meaning is, Truly, O 
Father, what Thou hast done, most rightly hast Thou done, in that 
it hath pleased Thee to humble the proud, and exalt the lowly. 
Christ teaches that the original cause of the predestination and 
election of the faithful, as well as the reprobation of unbelievers and 
the wicked is nothing else save God’s good pleasure. Wherefore, 
we ought to rest in that, and not seek for other reasons, since that 
one thing is sufficient for the faithful, and worth a thousand reasons. 
Hence the Blessed in Heaven, when they see their children and 
parents condemned for their demerits, do not lament, but approve 
and laud the just judgment of God. 

AH things are delivered unto Afe, &c. Christ said that the Almighty 
God was His Father, and that He — as Ix>rd of Heaven and earth — 
rejected the proud Pharisees, but revealed Himself and His grace 
to His lowly Apostles : but now, lest any one should suppose that 
Christ was inferior to the Father, He teaches the converse, namely, 
that the Father giveth all He hath to the Son — yea, that through the 
Son alone He worketh, teacheth, and bestoweth His gifts. 

Moreover, this expression, all things have been delivered unto Me by 
the Father \ ought to be thus understood, that nevertheless, Christ 
ought to be considered to possess all things by nature. “ For like as 
He is, according to His nature, life , He is said to be quickened by 
the Father ; and although He is the Lord of Glory, He is said to 
have received glory,” says the Council of Ephesus. The meaning 
therefore is, all things which the Father hath, viz., the divine nature, 
dominion and power, say SS. Hilary and Augustine, and consequently, 
what Christ here more particularly refers to, all things , *>., the 
dominion, power, and government of all things, but chiefly of men, 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


ALL KNOWLEDGE THROUGH THE SON. 


73 


have been granted unto Me by the Eternal Father, as to His Son by 
eternal generation, and in time the same things have been given to 
Me, as man, by the Hypostatic Union, that I may choose, illuminate, 
predestinate, save, whom I will, such as the Apostles ; and reject, and 
condemn, whom I accept not, such as the proud Capemaites. For 
in My hand is the predestination, or reprobation, the salvation or 
damnation of all men ; for as much as I have been appointed by God 
the Father the Saviour and Redeemer of the World, and in My hand 
the Father hath placed all things that I should repair and renew 
them. That as by Me as God He created all things, so also by Me 
in the flesh which I have assumed, He may re-create and restore all 
things. To this end I came, and for this I was made man. These 
mysteries therefore have been hidden from the wise, I mean My 
Mission, My Incarnation, the end of My advent, My work, but they 
have been already, in part, revealed to little ones, and shall hereafter 
be perfectly revealed. 

And no one knoweth the Son , &c., Luke x. 22, has, no one knoweth 
who the Son is, save the Father; nor who the Father is save the Son , 
&c. He means, I have been sent by the Father to be the Teacher 
and Saviour of the World, that I should teach men the truth and the 
way to God the Father, who is uncreated health and felicity. For 
this felicity, since it is supernatural, cannot be naturally known by 
man or angel Wherefore, as no one knoweth the Son except the 
Father, and he to whom the Father shall reveal Him, so likewise no 
one knoweth the Father except the Son, and he to whom the Son 
shall reveal Him. For as the Father communicates His nature, so 
likewise He communicates the knowledge of Himself and all things 
which He hath to the Son, and by Him to the rest of mankind. He, 
therefore, who desires to draw near to the truth, grace and salvation, 
which are in God the Father, must draw near through Me, and believe 
in Me. For I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life. My doctrine 
is the doctrine of God the Father. By Me, therefore, ye shall have 
access to the Father. 

Now although it is said, except the Son , the Holy Ghost is not ex- 
cluded : much less, when it is said, except the Father t h e- Son 


No 

DigitizSs^y^^OO^lC 



74 


S. MATTHEW, XI. 


excluded. For the rule of Theologians is, that exclusive particles, 
added to one of the Divine Persons in essential attributes do not 
exdude the other two Persons, but creatures only, or whatsoever is of 
a different essence. Thus S. Aug. (lib. 6. de Trin. c. 9.) S Cyril \ and 
the rest of the Fathers and Schoolmen. Observe that Christ, in the first 
place, revealed the knowledge of the two first Persons, viz., the Father 
and the Son, and afterwards, just before His death, faith in the third 
Person, viz., the Holy Ghost, as is plain from John, xvL 7. 

S. Chrysostom wisely observes (Horn. 39.) that it is not said, to 
whom He has been commanded by the Father to reveal, but to whom 
He will reveal \ in order that the Son may be shown to be equal to the 
Father in dominion and power. For, although Christ reveals as man, 
or by means of His human nature, yet this nature subsists in the 
Divine person, and therefore this man Christ is God, and equal to 
God the Father. 

Moreover, SS. Chrysostom and Irenseus (Lib. 4. c. 14.) answer 
Marcion, who rejected the Old Testament and its God, and said, if 
God the Father was not known before the revelation of Christ In- 
carnate, therefore He was not known in the Old Law, therefore its 
author and God was not the true God. Thus they expound the words, 
no one knowcth the Father except the Son of the Divine knowledge by 
which the Son qua God, comprehends the Father, and the Father the 
Son. You may, however, better understand it concerning the know- 
ledge communicated to the human nature of Christ : for this revealed 
His mysteries to the prophets and fathers, even the mysteries of the 
Divinity and the Trinity, Thus He revealed the same things after 
His Incarnation to the Apostles and faithful, qua man. For no one 
is a believer and a Christian except by Christ, and through Christ In- 
carnate. For, says St Jerome, it is one thing to know what thou 
knowest by equality of nature, as the Son knoweth the Father; 
another, by the condescension of Him who reveals, as we know God 
by the revelation of Christ 

Come unto Me all, &c. Syriac, who are weary and bear burdens. 
Arabic, who are worn with labour and heavily burdened. After He 
has shown the Majesty and Deity, lest any one should be affrighted at 
it, Christ adds the Humanity, and most kindly invites all to Him. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



MEANING OF CHRIST’S YOKE. 


75 

Come , not with the feet of the body, but with the affections of faith, 
hope, love, religion, devotion, and piety. 

All who labour, none are excluded. For there is no one who does 
not labour under some disease, and need Christ’s medicine. There- 
fore Christ offers Himself to all, that they may receive from Him 
health and safety. Thus did He kindly correct and heal Magdalen, 
Matthew, Paul, and Peter. Thus even now, in the Eucharist, He 
inviteth all and saith, Come unto me, ye infirm, hungry, afflicted ones 
I will refresh you. 

Who labour. Gr. ol Kom&vre c, *•*., who suffer trouble and ate 
burdened. See., who are fatigued and depressed, and are sinking under 
the burden, both of sins (as SS. Chrysostom, Jerome, and Augustin 
say), as well as of the law of Moses (as Theophylact), and also of the 
troubles and temptations of this life. 

And I will refresh you. Gr. hvavavo w, Le., I will give rest to 
the weary, as the Syriac translates. I will place you in all quietness, 
says St Chrysostom, by most soothing words, by Sacraments, as 
most efficacious medicines, by grace, and most sweet inward con- 
solations ; lastly by most felicitous glory in Heaven. 

Ihke, Syr., bear. My yoke. He means, ye have borne a heavy and 
well nigh intolerable yoke, and the burden of the old law of sin and 
concupiscence. Come unto Me, I will take it away, and will change 
it into the sweet yoke of the evangelical law of grace and charity. 1 
will refresh you by My yoke, which indeed is a yoke because it is a 
law binding the soul, but at the same time it is medicine, yea a bed, 
in which ye may sweetly rest, especially, by means of the humility 
which it teaches and commands. For it is the one and only medicine 
of all diseases, both of soul and body, and the alleviation and rest of 
all burthens. For nothing is harsh to the meek, nothing difficult to 
the lowly, says S. Leo. For as wool receives cannon balls and breaks 
their force by its softness, so meekness and humility break and soften 
all hard and rugged things. This yoke, therefore, is the gospel of 
Christ, and the law of grace. Whence S. Bernard (Serm. 15. in Ps. 
91) says, “ He invites those who labour to refreshment He calls 
those who are laden to rest ; and yet He does not take away either 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



76 


S. MATTHEW, XI. 


burden or labour, but He exchanges them for another burden, another 
labour, but a light burden, a sweet yoke, wherein rest or refreshment, 
even though it appear not, nevertheless is found.” 

And learn of Me , for I am meek and lowly in hearty in the 
affection of the heart, viz., will, says S. Bernard (Serm. 49 in Cant). For 
many are lowly in word, few in heart And ye shall find y &c. Listen 
to S. Augustine : “ Take my yoke upon you, and learn of Me, not to 
frame a world, not to create all things, visible and invisible, not to do 
miracles in the world and to raise the dead ; but that I am meek and 
lowly in heart Dost thou wish to be great, begin from the least 
Thou art thinking of constructing a mighty fabric of loftiness, think 
first of the foundation of humility. And as great as each one wishes 
to build up his edifice, the greater the building, so much the more 
deeply let him dig his foundation.” Wisely says Climacus ( Gradu 
25) : “ Humility is a grace of the soul without a name, being named 
by those alone who have made trial of it, an inexhaustible treasure, 
having obtained a name from God, a singular gift of God. Learn, 
He says, not of an angel, not of a man, not out of a book, but from 
Me, that is, from My dwelling in you. and working in you, because I 
am meek and lowly in heart, and in thought, and in sense, and ye 
shall find rest from internal conflicts in your souls. 

2. And better, Audor Imperf. and Maldonat Learn of Me, *>., 
do not fear to come to Me, and to take the yoke of My gospel on 
your neck, for if ye come and receive it, ye shall indeed learn that I 
am no tyrant, nor a severe and rigid King, but a lowly, meek, clement 
and benign Lord. 

Moreover, Christ was of so great humility and meekness in bearing 
with the Scribes, His disciples, and the multitude, in bearing injuries, 
derision, the scourge, the cross and death, that even if He had 
wrought no miracle He would, by such meekness, have proved suffi- 
ciently, and more than sufficiently, that He was the Man from Heaven 
and the true Prophet sent from God. I verily admire more Christs 
meekness, than His miracles and His raising the dead. 

Moraliter. Learn from hence how great, and how dear to Christ 
is humility. It is as if He said, learn of Me not to create a world, 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



HUMILITY MOST DEAR TO CHRIST. 


77 


not subtflely to dispute concerning God and the Holy Trinity, not to 
perform Herculean labours, but that I am meek and lowly in heart 

2d. Humility is the secret of peace. There is no rest for the mind, 
save in humility. Do you wish for rest ? Embrace humility, a lowly 
place, a lowly office, humble food, clothing, &c. It is impossible for 
the proud to have peace of soul, because they always desire great 
things, and often are unable to attain them. 

3d. Humility takes from man every labour and all burdens. Hu- 
mility is the alleviator of every labour, and the renewer of strength : 
as a certain Doctor has well said, humility is a medicine against all 
diseases; and health of soul and body. Moreover, Hippocrates hath 
said, Creatures without gall are long lived, /.&, animals which have no 
gall, such as stags, live long. The meek, therefore, and the humble, 
are healthy and long lived; for meekness brings into due order both 
the mental character and the humours of the body, which bile 
disorders, hence diseases. 

4th. Humility is the virtue of Christ Learn of Me, He says. This 
is mine own especial virtue, dear to Me above all others, which, by 
descending from Heaven to this lower world, and by stooping to the 
shameful death of the cross, I manifested in such a manner that none 
should be more illustrious and more wonderful in My life and in My 
death. Thus on the contrary, pride is the sin of Lucifer. Humility, 
therefore, makes us most like Christ What more worthy ? What 
more desirable? 

Well says S. Augustine (Epist 112). “They who have learnt of 
the Lord Jesus to be meek and lowly in heart make greater progress 
by praying and meditating, than by reading and hearing.” 

Finally, Christ here joins meekness with humility, because they 
are; as it were, twin sisters, or as mother and daughter. Whence S. 
Bernard (Sermon 2, on those words in the Apocalypse, cap . 12, A great 
sign) says, Like as naughtiness is the mother of presumption, so true 
meekness proceeds only from true humility. 

Hear Climacus ( Gradu . 24). The light of dawn goes before the 
sun, meekness precedes humility. Therefore, let us hear first Christ 
the Light, who disposes those things, as it were, by steps. Learn, He 


Digitized by 


Google 



78 


S. MATTHEW, XL 


says, of Me, for I am meek and lowly in heart After that, He thus 
defines meekness : Meekness is the immutable state of the mind 
which preserves an equable frame in good fortune and in disgrace. 
Meekness is sincerely and ex animo to pray for those who trouble 
you without being troubled yourself Meekness is a jutting rock 
against the fury of the sea, which breaks all its waves, whilst itself 
remains unmoved and unbroken. Meekness is the prop of patience, 
the gate of charity, yea its very parent, the proof of prudence. For 
He will teach, saith the Lord, the meek His ways. It is the procurer 
of pardon, the confidence of sinners in prayer, the habitation of the 
Holy Spirit “ For upon whom shall I look, save upon the meek and 
quiet person ?” (Psalm 66, Vulg.) 

For My yoke is sweet (Vulg.). The yoke and burden of Christ is 
the gospel, say SS. Hilary, Bede, and others. The law of the gospel, 
therefore, is a yoke, because it binds us to discipline, lest any one 
should depart from justice. The Gr. for sweet is not yXvtvc, Le., sweet 
like sugar, but xphotoq, Le., beneficial \ humane, kind (Arab.), good in 
comparison with the old law. rst Because it has fewer and easier 
precepts ; 2d. Because it gives greater grace, which much lightens the 
burden of the command ; 3d. Because it rules us as sons, not by fear, 
as servants, like the ancient law ; 4th. because it does not threaten, 
nor bring in death, like the old law, but takes it away ; 5th. Because 
it promises to those who keep it the most felicitous life, and as it 
were, leads them by the hand to the sweetness of celestial joys, 
according to the words, “ They shall be satisfied with the fulness of 
Thy house : Thou shalt give them drink of thy pleasures as out of a 
river.” Psalm xxxvi. 9. 

He says, therefore, take My yoke upon you, because in the yoke of 
Divine servitude, perfect consolation and refreshment are included. 
Whence S. Ambrose (Lib. de Helia etje/un . cap. 22): Receive, 
therefore, the yoke of Christ, do not fear because it is a yoke. Make 
haste, because it is light It doth not bruise the neck, but dignifies 
it Why do ye doubt ? Why delay ? It does not bind your neck 
with chains, but couples it with grace. It does not constrain of 
necessity, but directs the will to good works. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



CHRIST TO S. MECHTILDES. 


79 


Afy, because indeed I, Christ, lay it upon you, yea, indeed, I bear 
it with you, and put My neck under the burden, yea I bear and cany 
all the burden, and you yourself with it For that is called a yoke, 
which two beasts joined together bear. Christ then places one 
portion only of the yoke, t.e., the Evangelical Law, upon our neck ; 
He himself bears the other and heavier part, and therefore He draws 
this yoke with us, and infuses strength and courage into us to draw 
it, both by His grace and by His example. So lately there was a certain 
priest in Japan of the Society of Jesus, who generously endured a 
dreadful death for Christ's sake, who was often wont to say : “ Christ 
therefore makes the yoke putrescent before the face of the oil” Is. 
x. 27. (Vulg.) 

We may apply what we read in the life of S. Mechtildes, who when 
she was tormented with fearful headaches and could find no rest, 
heard these words from Christ as He showed her the wound in His 
side, enter now , and be at rest. This straightway she did, and 
entered in with gladness. And it seemed to her that He had as 
many silken pillows as she had felt pangs of headache. And the Lord 
said, “ Silk worms carry silk, and of Me it has been written, I am a 
worm and no man. Hitherto thou hast served Me devotedly in 
labours ; from henceforth thou shall study to serve Me in pleasing 
exercises of virtues by My example ; and the things which shall be 
insupportable to thee, I will carry with thee.’' 

This yoke, therefore, of Christ is not so much a yoke as a silken 
pillow, because it does not press us with trouble, but releases us from 
the weight of earthly things, and raises us to Heaven. 

Wherefore S. Bernard appositely compares this burden to the 
plumage of birds. Thus he writes to the monks (Epist. 341), “ In the 
way of life the more swiftly, the more easily we run ; and the larger the 
Saviour's light burden grows, the more portable it becomes. Does 
not the quantity of plumage a bird has lighten, rather than weigh it 
down ? Take away its feathers, and what remains of it is borne down 
to the ground by its own weight” 

Thus, likewise, is Christ’s discipline, thus His sweet yoke, thus 
His light burden; if we lay it down, we are ourselves depressed, 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



8o 


S. MATTHEW, XI. 


because He carries us rather than is carried by us. S. Ambrose adds 
(in Ps. cxix. Seim. 3), “To cany the yoke of Christ is sweet, if you 
consider it an ornament to your neck, not a burden. Lift up, there- 
fore, thine eyes to the Lord thy God, seek God, and thou shalt find 
Him. Erect thy neck ; thou earliest a necklace, not a chain. Many 
creatures delight in a necklace, and seem to themselves to be adorned 
rather than made naked ; like as the cheeks of the turtle-dove will 
bear the marks of her modesty, the necklace of her neck will raise 
the presumption of her liberty. There is nothing more glorious than 
that yoke of Christ” Lastly, S. Bernard (Serm. 15 in Ps. Qui habitai ) 
by yoke and burden understands the load of God’s gifts and favours, 
because the burden of the law which is imposed is the gift of grace, 
the perfect observance of which brings all other gifts into the mind. 
“ God burdens us when He unburdens us. He lades us with benefits 
when He unlades us of our sins. This is the voice of him who is 
burdened, “What shall I render unto the Lord for all the benefits that 
He hath done unto me ? ” The voice of him who is burdened, 
“Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord.” Moreover, to the 
proud and carnal, the yoke of Christ and the law of humility, absti 
nence, continence, mortification, seems very heavy and intolerable, 
because they are devoid of the Spirit, and only love and think of the 
flesh and fleshly things. Truly says S. Chrysostom (Horn. 14, in 1 
ad Cor.)> “Virtue is rugged if it be compared with our weakness ; 
for that it is easy and light, hear Christ testifying, My yoke is sweet, 
and My burden is light. But if thou dost not understand, let not 
wonder seize thee, for thou art not of a brave mind : for as, when 
strength of mind is present heavy things become light, so when it is 
absent, light things become heavy. What, I ask, was sweeter than 
manna? What readier to their hand? Nevertheless the Jews mur- 
mured when they were feeding on delicacies. What more dreadful 
than the hunger and the other labours which Paul endured ? Never* 
theless he rejoiced and was glad, saying, Now I rejoice in mine 
infirmities. What, then, was the cause of these things ? Diversity 
of mind, which, if thou wouldst make it such as it ought to be, thou 
wouldst discern the easiness of virtue,” 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



8i 


CHAPTER XII. 

I Christ reproveth the blindness of the Pharisees concerning the breach of the sabbath , 
3 by scriptures , 9 by reason , 13 and by a miracle, 22 He healeth the man 
possessed that was blind and dumb . 31 Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall 

never be forgiven, 36 Account shall be made of idle words. 38 He rebuheth the 
unfaithful , who seek after a sign ; 49 and shcweth who is his brother , sister , and 
mother, 

A T that time Jesus went on the sabbath day through the com ; and his disciples 
were an hungred, and began to pluck the ears of corn, and to eat 
2 But when the Pharisees saw it, they said unto him, Behold, thy disciples do 
that which is not lawful to do upon the sabbath day. 

3 But he said unto them, Have ye not read what David did, when he was an 
hungred, and they that were with him ; 

4 How he entered into the house of God, and did eat the shewbread, which was 
not lawful for him to eat, neither for them which were with him, but only for the 
priests? 

5 Or have ye not read in the law, how that on the sabbath days the priests in 
the temple profane the sabbath, and are blameless ? 

6 But I say unto you. That in this place is one greater than the temple. 

7 But if ye had known what this meaneth, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, 
ye would not have condemned the guiltless. 

8 For the Son of man is Lord even of the sabbath day. 

9 And when he was departed thence, he went into their synagogue : 

10 H And, behold, there was a man which had his hand withered. And they 
asked him, saying, Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath days? that they might 
accuse him. 

11 And he said unto them, What man shall there be among you, that shall 
have one sheep, and if it hill into a pit on the sabbath day, will he not lay hold on 
it, and lift it out ? 

12 How much then is a man better than a sheep ? Wherefore it is lawful to do 
well on the sabbath days. 

VOL. IJ. q 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



82 


S. MATTHEW, XII. 


13 Then saith he to the man, Stretch forth thine hand. And he stretched it 
forth ; and it was restored whole, like as the other. 

14 Then the Pharisees went out, and held a council against him, how they might 
destroy him. 

15 But when Jesus knew it, he withdrew himself from thence : and great 
multitudes followed him, and he healed them all ; 

16 And charged them that they should not make him known : 

17 That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying, 

18 Behold my servant, whom I have chosen ; my beloved, in whom my soul is 
well pleased : I will put my spirit upon him, and he shall shew judgment to the 
Gentiles. 

19 He shall not strive, nor cry ; neither shall any man hear his voice in the streets. 

20 A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench, till 
he send forth judgment unto victory. 

21 And in his name shall the Gentiles trust. 

22 U Then was brought unto him one possessed with a devil, blind and dumb ; 
and he healed him, insomuch that the blind and dumb both spake and saw. 

23 And all the people were amazed, and said, Is not this the son of David ? 

24 But when the Pharisees heard it, they said, This fellow doth not cast out 
devils, but by Beezlebub the prince of the devils. 

25 And Jesus knew their thoughts, and said unto them. Every kingdom 
divided against itself is brought to desolation ; and every city or house divided 
against itself shall not stand : 

26 And if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself ; how shall then 
his kingdom stand ? 

27 And if I by Beezlebub cast out devils, by whom do your children cast them 
out ? therefore they shall be your judges. 

28 But if I cast out devils by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God is 
come unto you. 

29 Or else, how can one enter into a strong man’s house, and spoil his goods, 
except he first bind the strong man ? and then he will spoil his house. 

30 He that is not with me is against me ; and he that gathereth not with me 
scattereth abroad. 

31 Wherefore I say unto to you. All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be 
forgiven unto men ; but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven 
unto men. 

32 And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven 
him: but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven 
him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come. 

33 Either make the tree good, and his fruit good ; or else make the tree corrupt, 
and his fruit corrupt : for the tree is known by his fruit 

34 O generation of vipers 1 how can ye, being evil, speak good things ? for out 
of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh. 

35 A good man, out of the good treasure of the heart, bringeth forth good 
things : and an evil man, out of the evil treasure, bringeth forth evil things. 

36 But I say unto you, That every idle word that men shall speak, they shall 
give account thereof in the day of judgment 

37 For by thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be 
condemned 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


THE CORN FIELDS. 83 

38 1 f Then certain of the scribes and of the Pharisees answered, saying, Master 
we would see a sign from thee. 

39 But he answered and said unto them, An evil and adulterous generation 
seeketh after a sign ; and there shall no sign be given to it, but the sign of the 
prophet Jonas : 

40 For as Jonas was three days and three nights in the whale’s belly : so shall 
the son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth. 

41 The men of Nineveh shall rise in judgment with this generation, and shall 
condemn it : because they repented at the preaching of Jonas ; and, behold, a 
greater than Jonas is here. 

42 The queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with this generation, 
and shall condemn it : for she came from the uttermost parts of the earth to hear 
the wisdom of Solomon 5 and, behold, a greater than Solomon is here. 

43 When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through dry places, 
seeking rest, and findeth none. 

44 Then he saith, I will return into my house from whence I came out ; and 
when he is come, he findeth it empty, swept, and garnished. 

45 Then goeth he, and taketh with himself seven other spirits more wicked 
than himself, and they enter in and dwell there : and the last state of that man is 
worse than the first. Even so shall it be also unto this wicked generation. 

46 U While he yet talked to the people, behold, his mother and his brethren 
stood without, desiring to speak with him. 

47 Then one said unto him, Behold, thy mother and thy brethren stand without, 
desiring to speak with thee. 

48 But he answered and said unto them that told him, Who is my mother ? and 
who are my brethren ? 

49 And he stretched forth his hand toward his disciples, and said, Behold my 
mother and my brethren ! 

50 For whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same 
is my brother, and sister, and mother. 


At that time Jesus went through the com fields (Through the crops 
of com becoming white, or ripe), &c. Luke adds that this Sabbath 
was the first from the second ( Vulg.) ; which I will explain in the 
proper place. Again there is here a Hysterologia ; for these things 
appear to have happened after the Mission of the Apostles, and there- 
fore before the Sermon on the Mount, as may be gathered from 
Mark ii. 22, and Luke vL i. That they rubbed the ears of com in 
their hands, and satisfied their hunger is, says S. Jerome, a mark of 
their austere life. 

But when the Pharisees saw it, & c. Luke vii. 2, has, they said 

unto them, i.e., to the disciples of Christ, because they brought 
forward the objection first against the disciples, afterwards against 
Christ. 

G 2 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



84 


S. MATTHEW, XII. 


Observe, they do not find fault with the disciples for plucking 
ears of com, or grapes ; for this was permitted by the law, Deut xxiiL 
25, but because they did it on the Sabbath. For to pluck ears seems 

a servile work, and therefore, a violation of the rest and sanctity of 
the Sabbath. 

AUegot tcally. SS. Hilary, Ambrose, and Bede think that it is signified 
by this that the Apostles in the second Sabbath from the first, *>., in 
the time of the gospel would gather grains from the seed and crops 
of preaching, *>., the elect faithful, from among all nations, by whose 
faith and piety they should be fed, until they should lay them up 
with themselves in the heavenly bam. But the Pharisees seeing the 
Gentiles preferred to themselves in the Gospel envied them, and 
vainly murmured against the Apostles. 

Tropologically : Bede says, “Those walk with the Lord, through 
the com fields, who delight to meditate on the sacred oracles. They 
hunger, when they desire to find therein the bread of life ; and that 
on the Sabbath, when they are glad to rest with a mind free from 
disturbing thoughts. They mb the ears, and purify them from the 
husks that they may reach the grain, when they take up the testi- 
monies of Scripture, and dwell upon them until they find in them, as it 
were the marrow of love. But this refreshment of the mind is dis- 
pleasing to fools, and is approved by the Lord.” 

But He said unto them y Have ye not read— And they that were with 
Him t This last seems to be at variance with 1 Sam. 21, where it 
is said, David was alone. I answer, David flying from Saul, went 
alone to Ahimelech, whom Mark calls Abiathar, the high priest ; and 
asked, and received the loaves from him, which he brought to the 
companions of his flight, whom he had left, elsewhere, waiting for 
him, as is plain both from this passage, as well as from 1 Sam. 21, 
where David says to the priest, “ I have appointed to the young men 
for such and such a place.” So S. Jerome. 

How he entered \ &c. The shew-bread. The shew-bread were loaves 
always set forth in the Holy Place, before the Holy of Holies, which 
was, as it were, the throne of God, sitting upon the Mercy-seat ; they 
were loaves, therefore, set forth before the face of God. Whence 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



THE SHEW BREAD. 


«S 


the LXX. has Aprovc in iiWovc, i.e., panes faeialts , Syriac, the bread of the 
lord's table. In Heb. they are called, nanS lachme panim , 
that is, loaves of faces . They were twelve, six on one side of the 
table and six on the other side, as there are two cheeks on a face. 
By these twelve loaves, the twelve tribes of Israel confessed that 
they were continually fed and nourished by God. Wherefore frank- 
incense was put upon them (see Lev. xxiv.) ; for frankincense was 
the symbol that they were the Lord’s, and were offered to Hina. In 
return, God, from His satisfaction at the offering of these loaves 
made manifest that He always remembered the twelve tribes, and 
had them before His face continually. See what has been said on 
Exod. xxv. 30. God had commanded these sacred loaves to be 
renewed every Sabbath. New loaves were placed upon the table, 
and the old were taken away. They were eaten by the priests 
only, and that only in the Tabernacle, as is plain from Lev. xxiv. 
8, 9. The force of the argument is this : David, a man after God’s 
own heart, made use of the holy shew-bread, in the necessity of his 
hunger — loaves which it was not lawful for laymen to eat — because 
he wisely judged, that this positive law concerning laymen not eating 
them ought to yield to the law of nature, which dictates that in grave 
necessity of famine life ought to be preserved by eating any bread 
whatsoever, even loaves consecrated to God. Thus, SS. Paulinus 
and Laurence, and others, sold chalices and vessels consecrated to 
God, that by the money which they fetched they might afford help 
to the poor in their hunger and necessity. Therefore, saith Christ 
in effect, “Much rather is it lawful for Me and My disciples to pluck 
ears of com on the Sabbath, that by the grains extracted from them 
we may relieve our hunger. For the sanctity of the Sabbath, for- 
bidding servile work, such as plucking ears of com, is a divine 
positive law, and ought to yield to the law of nature, which dictates 
that in hunger it is our duty to sustain life by any kind of food.” 

Or have ye not read \ &c. Profane , viz., by slaying and skinning 
and cutting up the victims, by laying the wood in order, and by 
kindling a fire, by which the victims might be burnt in God’s honour. 
These works, considered merely in themselves, are servile, and 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


86 


S. MATTHEW, XII. 


would profane the Sabbath unless piety excused them, and, instead 
of servile and profane, made them sacred and divine. The meaning 
is, As necessity excused David and piety the priests, so do both 
excuse My disciples from a breach of the Sabbath, for this plucking 
of the ears. For they follow Me as the Messiah, and are so intent 
upon My sacred doctrine that they have forgotten to prepare food. 
Observe the expression, have ye not read f The following words are 
nowhere found literally in Scripture, but they occur in sense in 
Numb, xxviii. and elsewhere, where the rites of sacrificing on the 
Sabbath are sanctioned. Hence it is an axiom of the Jews, u there 
is no Sabbath in the temple;” that is, no cessation from work, 
because of the slaying and burning the sacrifices. 

But I say unto you, &c. For Christ, Who here speaks, allows 
His disciples to pluck the ears. Christ speaks of Himself in the 
third person out of modesty. The meaning is, If the sanctity of 
the temple frees from blame the sacrificing priests who break the 
Sabbath, a like cause excuses My disciples, for I am greater and 
holier than the temple. Yea, I am the Lord of the temple, to 
whom, in truth, all the victims in the temple were offered and 
sacrificed. 

But if ye had known what that meaneth , &c. Syriac, ye would 
not have condemned them (my disciples), since they are guiltless . He 
cites Hosea vi. 6, which see. The force of the argument is, 
mercy is more powerful, and better than sacrifice or Sabbath, there- 
fore for its sake it is lawful to violate the rest of the Sabbath. 
Wrongly, therefore, 0 ye Scribes, do ye condemn My disciples in this 
matter, for they are innocent, and free from all blame therein, be* 
cause of the mercy which is here exercised. The mercy is, that I 
have permitted My hungry servants to pluck these ears on the 
Sabbath. Moreover, I enjoin upon them by My word, as well as by My 
example, that they should have compassion upon so many wretched 
perishing souls, and should procure their salvation, by teaching, ad- 
monishing, and praying for them, with zeal and care.” To this 
applies that golden sentence of Simeon the Just (this is he who, as 
the Hebrews think, took Christ in His arms, and sang his last song 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



THE HEBREW OF S. MATTHEW. 


87 


Lord now lettest thou thy setvant depart in peace ) in Pirke Aboth , 
Le., The sentences of the Fathers, , u The world rests upon, and is 
supported by, three things, 1. by the law, a. by Divine worship, 3. by 
mercy. 

For the Son of man, &c. I, who by nature am the Son of God, 
and have deigned to become the Son of Man, i.e., man, am by this 
very circumstance, the Lord, that is the author and lawgiver of the 
whole Mosaic Law, and consequently also of the Sabbath. There- 
fore I am able to give to My disciples a dispensation with respect 
to it 

And when he had passed over from thence, &c. Luke adds, that 
this was done on another Sabbath. For Christ designedly chose 
the Sabbath day for a fresh miracle, that he might, again and again, 
refute the error of the Scribes, that it was unlawful to heal sick 
persons on the Sabbath. 

And behold a man having his hand withered, \ &c. S. Jerome 
adds, “ in the Gospel, which the Nazareni and Ebionites use, which 
we have lately translated from Hebrew into Greek, and which is 
called by very many persons the original ( authenticuni ) of Matthew, 
this man, who had the withered hand, is called a mason. And he 
prayed for help in these words, I was a mason, gaining my livelihood 
by my hands : I beseech Thee, O Jesus, that Thou wouldst restore 
me to soundness, that I may not shamefully beg my bread.” By 
the word hand understand arm : for x c *P> hand , is made by 
Hippocrates to extend from the shoulder to the fingers. This man’s 
arm was affected by a double disease. 1. A convulsion of the 
nerves. 2. Atrophy, for it was dried up for want of aliment, and 
was therefore naturally incurable. 

And they asked him, i.e., the Scribes and Pharisees asked Christ, 
whether it were lawful to heal on the Sabbath day? Then, as 
Mark relates (iii. 4), Christ in turn asked the Scribes another ques- 
tion, which was the solution of their own, i.e., whether it were 
lawful to do good on the Sabbath, and heal the withered hand ; or 
to do evil, i.e., not to heal, and do harm ? He intimates, not to 
do good to one who is in misery, when it is in your power, is to 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


88 


S. MATTHEW, XII. 


do him an injury ; and not to save life, or a soul, when you can, 
is to destroy it Since, therefore, this is a command of the law oi 
nature, it is not forbidden by the positive law of the Sabbath ; foi 
that would be unreasonable. 

That they might accuse Him , to the common people, as bemg either 
powerless, or unmerciful, if He did not heal the sick man; but to 
the chief priests, as a violator of the Sabbath, if He did heal him. 

But he said unto them, &c. He means to say, ye Scribes teach 
the Sabbath is not broken, if any one pull out a sheep fallen into a 
ditch on the Sabbath day that the sheep may not remain in the 
ditch and suffer hunger, on the Sabbath. Much more therefore is 
it lawful to release on the Sabbath a man afflicted with sickness. 
Thus thought the Scribes in the time of Christ, but now some 
Jews observe the rest of the Sabbath so superstitiously that they are 
not willing on that day to pull a man out of a ditch or sewer, nor 
to suffer themselves, if they have fallen in, to be drawn out Volater 
(lib. 3, Geograph .) relates an amusing thing, which happened in the 
reign of Henry III. of England. A certain Jew fell into a drain at 
Tewkesbury on the Sabbath, and on account of his religion would 
not be drawn out The Christian earl of the place, seeing it, would 
not allow him to be pulled out on the next day, through reverence 
for Sunday. Thus the man was choked, and died before he was drawn 
out The Jew said — 

* With putrid mud I’d rather choke, 

Than Jewish Sabbath should be broke.” 

To whom the earl replied, 

“ The Christian Sabbath keep thou too. 

Friend Solomon, thou faithless Jew.” 

How much rather is a man better (more worthy, noble, excellent) t 
&c. If it is lawful to release a sheep from calamity on the Sabbath, 
why not a man? Especially since in lifting out the sheep there 
would be need of considerable labour ; but Christ was about to effect 
the healing of the sick man by a single word. How could this be a 
servile work? Wherefore Mark adds, looking round about upon them 
with anger, being grieved at the hardness of their hearts. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


THE WITHERED HAND. 


89 


Then He saith to the man , &c. Christ first by reason, now by a 
deed, viz., a miracle, confutes the ignorance of the Scribes, and makes 
manifest His own wisdom and goodness. Hear S. Athanas. ( Horn . de 
Semente, sub Jin . tom.), “ Then Jesus saith to him, Stretch forth thine 
hand, for I do not touch thee, lest the Jews should have wherewith 
to accuse Me, lest with them, to touch, should be the same as to 
work. I act by word alone, for it has not been forbidden by God to 
speak on the Sabbath. If, then, a word performs the work, let him 
who says this word be held in admiration by you. Observe, too, the 
different way in which miracles are wrought When Peter healed the 
paralytic at the Beautiful Gate of the Temple, he took him by the 
right hand, and lifted him up. The Lord, on the other hand, only 
commands, saying, Stretch forth thine hand, I give thee power to be 
healed. Thus He spake, thus He did, and the hand was restored.” 

Allegorically . 1. Beda says, Adam plucking the forbidden fruit, 

dried up the hand of the human race, ie. f he deprived man of the 
power to be fruitful in good works. Christ restored that power by 
stretching forth His own hands upon the cross. 

2. S. Jerome : " Until the coming of the Saviour, the hand of the 
Jews was withered in the synagogue, and the works of God were not 
done in it Afterwards He came on earth, and the right hand of 
believers was restored by the Apostles, and rendered fit to do the 
first works.” 

Theologically . Hear S. Anselm : 14 The hand that is withered, and 
is to be healed, is ordered to be stretched out, because the weakness 
of an unfruitful soul can be cured in no better manner than by the 
liberality of alms-giving. Wherefore John the Baptist advised the 
multitudes who asked him what they should do that they should not 
like dried trees be cast into the fire, do this one thing, 4 He who hath 
two coats, let him impart to him that hath none ; and he who hath 
food, let him do likewise/ And in Ecclus. iv. 36, 4 In vain does a man 
stretch forth his hands to God, to beg remission of his sins who does 
not extend the same hands to confer a benefit upon the poor man 
who asks him.”' 

Going out ; &c. The Pharisees went out of the synagogue and left 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


90 S. MATTHEW, XII. 

the multitude, in whose presence they did not dare to murmur against 
Christ 

And He commanded them , that they should not make Him known. 
Commanded , Gr. iirerlfujae, i.e., He rebuked, threatened, commanded 
with threats, that they should not make known the miracles which He 
did, as well that He might not offend the Scribes, and excite them to 
greater envy and wrath, as that He might show how far removed He 
was from seeking glory of men. 

Behold My servant (Vulg. puer meus) {Messias, Chald), &c. I will 
put my spirit , &c. I will endow Him with the gifts of the Holy 
Ghost in His conception. The Heb. is, na« Abdi, i.e., My servant \ 
from whence it is plain Isaiah here speaks of Christ, not as He is God, 
but as He is man, for as such He is God’s servant 

It proves that Christ, by teaching and healing the sick, fulfilled 
the prophecy of Isaiah concerning Himself, and His modesty, mercy, 
and equity; and therefore showed that He was the very Messiah 
foretold by Isaiah, and renowned for these gifts as by certain marks. 
Instead of, whom I have chosen , the Hebrew is, I will receive Him; 
LXX., I will take Him up; Chaldee, I will move Him. 

And he shall show judgment \ &c . ; i.e., what is just and equal : 
for this is the judgment of righteous judges. For Christ, as a law 
giver, shall preach the Evangelical law, not only to the Jews, like 
Moses, but, by the Apostles, to all nations whatsoever. 

He shall not strive, & c. ; the meekness of Christ, and His gentle 
method of teaching, are here noted. 

A bruised reed, & c. Syriac and Arabic, and He shall not extin- 
guish a lamp verging on extinction . This is a genuine proverb, 
meaning that Christ will not contentiously rebuke and oppress 
those who are weak in faith, hope, and love, but will strengthen 
and kindle them by His own meekness, gentleness, and patience. 
Listen to the Fathers. S. Jerome says, “ He who does not stretch 
out his hand to a sinner, nor cany a brother’s burden, breaks the 
bruised reed ; he who despises a spark of faith in the little ones, 
quenches the smoking flax.” S. Hilary : “ He shows that He might 
easily break the persecutors as a broken reed, and quench their 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


A THREEFOLD MIRACLE. 


9 1 


fury but, says S. Augustine, 44 He spares them because He came 
not to judgment" Rabanus says, 44 The bruised nations were not 
broken, but were reserved for salvation : neither were the Jews, who 
were agitated by the wind, condemned immediately, but were 
patiently borne with." 

Until he bring forth , &a, i.e., until He lead judgment \ justice, 

or faith, and gospel sanctity, to victory, so that it may indeed have 
dominion over the whole world. Wherefore, the Vulgate in Isaiah 
translates He will place (as though a lord and conqueror) judgment 
in the earth (as it were a queen and lady governing all). The Hebrew 
is, He shall bring fotth judgment unto truth , /•&, He shall bring 
true judgment. 

And in His name, &c* Instead of Gentiles, the Hebrew has 

i 

islands, meaning most remote nations, dwelling in islands, who shall 
place all their hope in Christ the Saviour. I have expounded all 
this more at length on Isaiah xlil i, which see 

Then there was brought unto Him a man having a devil. Luke 
(xi 14) says only that he was dumb : whence S. Augustine (Z. 2 de 
Consens. Evang. sec. 37) is of opinion that Luke is speaking of 
another demoniac; but Luke does not say that he was not blind. 
Now the man was not blind and dumb from birth, or by disease, 
as Abul. and Barradi think, but was deprived of the use of his 
eyes and ears through the demoniacal possession. The demon, 
therefore, had not made him blind, nor taken away the faculty of 
speech, but only hindered the exercise of both. Whence, when the 
demon was cast out, without any other miraculous operation, the 
man began both to speak and to see. Thus S. Chrysostom, Enthym., 
Lyra, Jansen, Maldonatus. Hear S. Chrysostom : 44 O pestiferous 
craft of the devil ! he seized upon, and obstructed both the ways, 
— sight and hearing — by which the man might believe." Hence S. 
Luke says that demon was dumb , &c., in its effects, because it made 
the man dumb whom it possessed. There was, then, in this miracle 
a threefold effect. For, us S. Jerome says, 44 In this one man three 
signs were wrought at one and the same time ; the blind sees, the 
dumb speaks, the possessed of the devils is delivered." 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


9 * 


8. MATTHEW, XU. 


Tropologically : S. Jerome says, “ What was then done literally is 
daily fulfilled in the conversion of believers, that, when the devil has 
been driven out, they may first behold the light of faith, and then 
open their mouths to speak the praises of God.” Then S. Augustine 
says, u He, having a devil, is blind and dumb, who does not believe : 
and he is a slave of the devil, who does not understand, and does 
not confess the true faith, or who does not give praise to God.” (Lib. 
i. qucest. Evangel, q. 3.) The devil then makes men dumb lest they 
should confess their sins and expel their poison ; lest they should 
praise God ; lest they should instruct their neighbours : but Christ by 
His grace, looses their mouths to confess, to praise, to teach. Wisely 
saith S. Bernard (in Sententiis) “ Why art thou ashamed to speak of 
thy sin, when thou wast not ashamed to do it ? or why dost thou 
blush to confess to God, from whose eyes thou canst not be hid ? And 
if thou art so grievously ashamed to expose thy sin to one man, a 
sinner himself, what wilt thou do in the day of judgment, when thy 
consciousness of guilt will be exposed to all ? ” 

And all the multitudes were amazed, &c. i&aravro, i.e., were 
astonished and admired so that they, as it were, were rapt out of 
themselves in an ecstasy, at seeing so many and so great miracles 
of Christ ; wherefore they said, No Prophet hath done so many 
miracles as Jesus hath. Therefore He is greater than them all. 
Consequently, He is the Son of David, the Messiah promised to 
David, whom we are all eagerly expecting. 

When the Pharisees heard it, &c. The Pharisees were so blinded 
by their envy and hatred of Christ, that when they could not deny 
His miracles so clearly attested, they slanderously said, that they were 
magical, and not wrought by power of God, but by Beelzebub. They 
made Christ to be a magician who had a familiar demon, by whose 
power He wrought miracles. 

But if Satan cast out Satan, See. It means the kingdom of Satan 
upon earth could not stand, if Satan, i.e., one devil were constantly 
to rise up against another devil, and fight with him, so that the inferior 
should be continually striving to cast out his superior from men. 
Thus you, O ye Scribes, behold Me, continually and assiduously, 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



STRIFE AMONG DEMONS. 


93 


with hostility punish the devils, and expel them from the souls and 
bodies of men. Therefore, not by the help of Beelzebub, but by the 
power of God, I cast them out, Neither indeed is Beelzebub so 
foolish as to send the devils who are subject to him, to drive out one the 
other. For by so doing he would destroy his and their kingdom. So 
also mutinous soldiers, when they rebel against their prince are 
closely and intimately united among themselves, for they know, if 
they should disagree, they would easily be overthrown by their prince. 
I have spoken of Christ’s hostility to the devils ; because Apollonius 
of Tyana, as Philostratus testifies in his life, and magicians cast out 
devils, but by collusion with them, that they may entice men to sor- 
cerers, and to sorcery, #.*, fellowship with the devil But Christ 
proves by what follows, that He had no fellowship with the deviL 
I spoke also of habitual warfare ; for frequently strife and battle 
will arise among the devils for the possession of a man. An aged 
priest, worthy of credit, who had dischaiged the office of exorcist 
for many years and expelled devils at Rome, once told me he had 
seen with his eyes, and heard with his ears, two men possessed 
with devils, contending and fighting with one another, in the Church 
of S. Matthew. The devil who possessed one of the men was of a 
higher order and superior to the other; and he wished to cast out 
the other devil, as an inferior, from the man whom he possessed. 
But the inferior devil resisted, and greatly abused his superior ; and 
among other things, he said to him, “Thou art an infernal devil, and 
by the just judgment of God being banished to hell, art far more 
heavily punished than I am, who am not an infernal devil, but am 
permitted to live here in the air, because I did not rebel against 
God as thou didst, but only dave and consented to Lucifer, as a 
subject to my superior." But such things as this are very uncommon 
and are succeeded by peace, even as these two devils after a short 
time laid aside their contention, and rested, and held their peace. 
For although those who are damned, and the devils, burn with 
pride, wrath, and hatred one against another, and quarrel, and tear 
one another in hell like dogs; nevertheless, on earth they must 
agree among themselves, in order that they may establish their king- 
dom and dominion over men. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



94 


S. MATTHEW, XII. 


But if I beg Beelzebub } &c. This is Christ’s second proof, by which 
He shows, that he cast out devils by the help of God not of Satan, 
By your sons , in the first place, SS. Hilar., Chrys., Theoph., Enthym. 
understand, your Apostles , for they were sons of the Jews. These 
writers think that this happened after Christ sent forth the Apostles, 
when the Apostles, by the help of Christ, cast out devils, and 
wrought many miracles. But it is more probable that this hap- 
pened before the mission of the Apostles. Hence it is better to 
understand by your sons , Jewish exorcists, who, by the method 
handed down by Solomon, expelled demons. (See Joseph. Lib. 8, 
cap. 2.) Such exorcists were the seven sons of Sceva, a chief of the 
priests (Act xix. 14). So Jansen, Tolet, and others. 

Therefore they shall be your judges . In the day of judgment, 
they shall, by their deeds, condemn you, because ye have passed 
so perverted a judgment upon Me, namely that they have cast out 
devils by the help of God, but I by the assistance of Satan* 
although ye behold far greater proofs of the presence and operation 
of God in Me, than in your own exorcists. For who of them has 
healed so many sick, and raised so many dead persons as I have 
done ? Who of them has preached such sublime and Divine doctrine 
as I preach ? Therefore shall the Queen of Sheba and the Ninevites, 
by their faith and repentance in the day of judgment condemn the 
unbelieving Jews. 

But if I by the Spirit of God , &c. If I by the power of God and 
the Holy Ghost not of Beelzebub, cast out devils, then that is 
true (and the Holy Ghost himself manifestly attests it by his 
concurrence) which I and John Baptist have put forward as the 
head and* sum of our preaching — the kingdom of Heaven is at hand. 
Ye see the kingdom of the devil by Me everywhere destroyed by 
My words, and by what I effect in the bodies and souls of men : and 
thus God’s kingdom is begun by grace. This is what John says 
(1 Epist. iii. 8), In this the Son of God was manifested that he 
might destroy the works of the devil. For as S. Leo says, " Those 
nails which pierced the Lord’s hands and feet inflicted eternal wounds 
upon the devil ; and the punishment of His holy limbs was the death 
of the hostile powers. 19 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



DESPOILING SATAN. 


95 


Or how can one enter into the strong man's house , &c. Instead 
of, or, the Gr. has tj , which Pagninus translates otherwise ; the Arab. 
and; others, for. A new reason is here given, the third, whereby 
Christ proves that He casts out devils by the help of God, not of 
Beelzebub. The argument is drawn from a comparison, thus : As 
he who attacks the castle of any strong or valiant man, like Samson 
or Hercules, to spoil it, is not able to accomplish it unless he first 
vanquish and bind the strong man; so in like manner, I Christ, 
who spoil the kingdom of Satan by leading sinners, his subjects, to 
repentance and salvation, must needs overcome and bind Satan 
himself ; for, otherwise, he would not allow this spoliation. Satan 
therefore is My enemy, and has been overthrown by Me. He is not 
My friend or ally in casting out demons, as ye calumniously assert 
The strong man then, in this passage, is the devil ; the house is 
the world ; the vessels are his arms \ his goods, his instruments. 
The arms of the devil are fraud and deceit by which he entices 
men to sin ; his arms are wealth, honours, riches. They are also 
inferior demons and wicked men, says S. Chrysostom. These the 
devil makes use of against us, to tempt and vex us. His goods are 
the souls of sinners, and the bodies of the possessed ; yea the souls 
of the fathers detained in Limbus before Christ. All these Christ 
took away from the devil, and bound him in hell 
Moreover, the devil is here called a strong one, because he goeth 
about like a roaring lion seeking whom he may devour, as S. Peter 
saith. Job (40 and 41) depicts his strength and might under the figures 
of Behemoth and Leviathan. By the strong man understand Lucifer, 
the prince of the devils, the antagonist of Christ and S. Michael. 
For Lucifer, being conquered by Christ on the Cross, was thrust down 
to hell, that there he should remain, personally bound, until the day 
of judgment. Then he will be loosed for a little space, as John says 
(Apoc. xx.). Nevertheless, Lucifer is so bound in hell, that he is not 
only able to go forth himself, but even by means of his demons, whom 
he sends forth into the world. Yet he is not able to hurt men as 
much as he was before. For Christ has greatly restrained and 
diminished the power and might of the demons. S. Anthony was 


Digitized by 


Google 



96 


S. MATTHEW, XII. 


taught this by long experience, as S. Athanas. testifies in his Life . 
“The devil,” he says, “ was hooked by the Lord, like a dragon, by the 
hook of the Cross ; and was taken in a drag-net, and was bound like 
a fugitive slave, and his lips were perforated by a ring and a bracelet, 
and he is not permitted to devour any of the faithful. Now, like a 
wretched sparrow, he is made sport of by Christ ; now he groans at 
his companions, being trodden like serpents and scorpions under the 
heels of Christians. He who boasted that he drank up every sea, 
he who pretended that he held the world in the hollow of his hand, 
lo I he is conquered by you; lo ! he is not able to prevent my entering 
the lists against him.” And he confirms this by the devil's own con 
fession {cap, 20). “ I saw,” he said, “ a man of enormous height, 

whose head reached unto Heaven. When I asked him who he was, 
he said, I am Satan. And I, What seekest thou here? He answered, 
Why do all Christian people curse me ? I answered, Hast thou not 
read, ‘Because the swords of the enemy have failed at the end, and 
thou hast destroyed their cities ? ' ( Vulg.) He said, Lo, now have I 
no place, I possess no city, I have no arms : the name of Christ 
sounds throughout all nations and all provinces, and the wilderness 
is peopled with choirs of monks. Let them, I beseech you, look at 
themselves, and not wound me without cause.” 

He who is not with Me is against Me, First, SS. Hilary, Jerome, 
Chrysostom, Theophylact expound of the strong man , i.e., the devil 
The devil is not with Me, in such manner that he is against Me : and 
the things which I gather, he strives to disperse. This, therefore, is 
a fourth argument of Christ against the Scribes. Its force is as 
follows : They whose works are contrary, are themselves contrary. 
But My works and the devil's are contrary ; therefore, t and he are 
contrary to each other. For, as S. Jerome says, “ He, the devil, 
desires to hold captive the souls of men, but the Lord to deliver 
them. He preaches idolatry, Christ, the knowledge of the one God; 
the one draws to vice, the other recals to virtue. How, then, can 
they have agreement between themselves, whose works are con- 
trary ?” 

2. You may take the passage more simply with S. Chrysostom, 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



BLASPHEMY OF THE SPIRIT. 


97 


with an application to the Pharisees, thus : As when a sedition arises 
in a kingdom or city, and one part rises against another part, so that 
evil-disposed men endeavour to seize upon the commonwealth, and 
spoil it, as Catiline with his fellow-conspirators did at Rome ; then it 
is necessaiy for good citizens to defend the state, and he who does 
not, but desires to be neutral, is looked upon as an enemy and a 
companion of the seditious : because, under those circumstances, all 
citizens are bound to help the city or republic with all their might 
Thus, in like manner, I, who have proclaimed universal war with 
Satan, that I may expel him frona his dominion over the world, look 
upon all men as it were citizens of the world, as subjects of Me, their 
true Prince. If, therefore, they are not with Me in this war, and if 
they do not fight under My banner, they are contrary to Me, and My 
enemies, and, as such, I shall treat them, and punish them. Such, 
therefore, are you, O ye Pharisees, who ought above all, as my sub- 
jects, and better instructed than other men, to receive Me as the 
Messiah, the Christ prophesied of in your law and the prophets, and 
to commend Me as such to the people; notwithstanding, ye are 
secretly My adversaries, and openly ye dissimulate as though ye were 
judges appointed to make inquisition concerning My life and 
doctrine. 

Thus this saying of Christ is not opposed to what He says in 
Luke ix. 50 — He who is not against you , is on your part: for there 
He is speaking of one who is really in doctrinal agreement with 
the Apostles, and therefore is with them and for them, although 
for some just reason he does not profess as much openly. 

Therefore I say unto you , every sin and blasphemy shall be for- 
given a man: but the blasphemy of the Spirit shall not be for- 
given. The word Spirit is in the genitive case, as is plain from the 
Greek irvevparos. The blasphemy therefore of the Spirit is blasphemy 
against the Holy Spirit Whence the Arabic translates, Blasphemy 
against the Holy Spirit; Syriac, Blasphemy against the Spirit of 
Holiness . 

You will ask, what is this blasphemy? 1. Philastrius (On the 
Heresy of Rotorius) thinks it is heresy, especially that of Eunomius, 

VOL. il h 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


i 


S. MATTHEW, XII. 


98 

who said that the Holy Ghost was not God. Thus also S. Ambrose 
(Lib. i, de Spir. Satie, sec. 3). 

2. S. Hilary thinks that blasphemy against the Holy Ghost is 
when a man denies that Christ is God. “ The sin against the Holy 
Ghost,” he says, “is to deny to God the power of virtue, and to 
take away from Christ His eternal substance, by which, because 
God came into man, man shall in turn come to God ; since God 
grants pardon to all other things, whilst this only is without for- 
giveness.” 

3. S. Ambrose (Z. 2, de pceniten. sec. 4) thinks it is schism ; also 
Simony, the sin whereby, for example, Simon Magus wished to buy 
the Holy Spirit of S. Peter. 

4. Origen says it is every mortal sin after Baptism ; committed, 
that is, after the grace of the Holy Spirit received in Baptism. 
Moreover, Pope Gelasius (de Anath. vine.) understands by it sins 
which are not forgiven, either in this world, or in the world to come. 
But he thinks it refers to sinners who do not wish to repent For 
he says, that man makes the sentence against himself irrevocable 
who wills to continue in such a state as that he cannot truly be 
forgiven. 

5. S. Cyprian (Z. 3, ad Quirinal> N. 28) says, blasphemy against 
the Holy Ghost is every sin committed against God : but blasphemy 
against the Son of Man is every sin committed against man. 

6. The same Saint (Z. 3, Epist. 14) thinks blasphemy against the 
Holy Ghost is denial of the faith in persecution. 

7. Richard of S. Victor says, it is to hate and revile God. 

I have summarily embraced eighteen expositions of the Fathers 
(viz., eleven of the Latin Fathers and seven of the Greek) in the 
foregoing paragraphs. 

Lastly, theologians — and from them, catechists— out of various 
expositions of S. Augustine, collect six sins against the Holy Ghost ; 
namely, presumption, despair, striving against known truth, envy of 
fraternal charity, impenitence, and obstinacy. They say that these 
are called sins against the Holy Ghost, because they are committed 
through undoubted wickedness against the goodness of God, which 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



FIGHTING AGAINST GOD. 


99 


is an attribute of the Holy Ghost. Thus, likewise, sins which are 
committed through infirmity are said to be done against God the 
Father, because power is one of His especial attributes. And sins 
which are done through ignorance, are said to be done against the 
Son, because of His attribute of wisdom. 

Note, therefore, that Christ is here speaking not of every sin 
against the Holy Ghost, but only of blasphemy against the Holy 
Ghost, which may take place by words; and the same reasoning 
will apply to thoughts and actions, as when anyone reviles works 
manifestly divine and miraculous, which God works for the salvation 
of men, by which He confirms faith and truth. Such a work is the 
casting out of devils ; and because such works proceed from the 
goodness and holiness of God, they are attributed to the Holy Ghost, 
who proceeds from the Father and the Son by procession and 
inspiration, as Love, Goodness, and Holiness. When, therefore, any- 
one calumniates such things, and knowingly out of malice ascribes 
them to an unclean spirit (as these Pharisees did), such an one is 
said to commit blasphemy against the Holy Ghost ; for such an one 
directly fights against God and takes from Him His holiness and 
purity. The whole argument is expressed in the following syllo- 
gism: — 

The author of the miracles which Christ performs is, according to 
you, O ye Scribes, Beelzebub : 

But God the Holy Ghost is, in truth, the Author of these 
miracles: 

Therefore, according to you, God and the Holy Ghost are Beel- 
tebub. 

What more horrible can possibly be said? What greater blas- 
phemy can be imagined? S. Basil adds that there are such persons 
even now, who ascribe the fruits and actions of the Holy Ghost to 
the opposing unclean spirit. We many of us do this, when we call 
earnestness ambition, and impute the calumny of anger to one who 
is only moved by zeal and righteous indignation. Moreover, Christ 
opposes this blasphemy against God and the Holy Ghost to that 
blasphemy against the Son of Man by which some who were offended 

H a 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


IOO 


8. MATTHEW, XII. 


at Christ’s human conversation, calumniated what He did as man, 
as when they called Him a wine bibber , and a friend of Publicans 
and sinners. This was something more excusable, and less unworthy 
of forgiveness, because it had respect to Christ as Man rather than 
as God. 

Shall not be forgiven : Arab. Shall not be relaxed \ i.e., shall 
with difficulty, and seldom be forgiven. For this blasphemy 
against the Holy Ghost is most horrible, inexcusable, and alto- 
gether unworthy of pardon, and, considered simply in itself, 
takes away and excludes all medicine, and means of ob- 
taining forgiveness. For such a blasphemer places himself in 
diametrical opposition to the Holy Ghost, and drives Him from him, 
yea blasphemes Him : the Holy Ghost, I say, by whom alone he 
could be absolved, healed, and sanctified. Similarly, we call an in- 
curable disease one, which does not admit of medicine, and rejects 
eveiy kind of food. Nevertheless a blasphemer does not shut up 
the hand of God, so that God cannot have mercy upon him, although 
unworthy ; and convert him, as He converted S. Paul, who confesses 
that he had been a blasphemer against God (i Tim. L 13). 

And whosoever shall speak a word, &c. Christ declares the same 
truth in still clearer words. A word, anything injurious, reviling, 
blasphemous, it shall be forgiven him, it is remissible, and is readily 
forgiven to the penitent. From hence, it is plain against the 
Novatians, that all persons who have lapsed into heinous sins, 
should be admitted to penance. 

But whosoever shall speak against the Holy Ghost, &c. Syriac, 
whosoever shall revile the Holy Ghost. 

Here, first, Origen is condemned, who extended repentance, pardon, 
and salvation, to all sinners, after this life. For he said, after the 
great year of Plato, all things would be restored afresh, and that 
Judas would be saved ; and Lucifer, together with the devils and 
the damned, would be brought back to heaven. 

a. S. Aug. (2 1 Civil. 24), S. Greg. (4 dialog. 39), Isidore, Bede, 
S. Bern., and others, quoted by Bellarmine (Lib. 2. de Purgat. sec. 
4), prove from this passage, that there is a Purgatory after this life. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



THE GOOD AND THE BAD TREE. 


IOI 


For it would be unmeaning to say, shall not be forgiven .... 
nor in the world to come , if there were no remission of sins in the 
world to come. Thus a person would speak vainly who said, I 
will never many a wife, neither in this world, nor in the world to 
to come, since no wife can be married in the world to come. 
Mark adds, and gives greater force to the saying : but shall be 
guilty of eternal damnation. Moreover mortal sins are expiated in 
Purgatory, so far only as pertains to their punishment, but venial sins 
as regards both fault and punishment 

Either make the tree goody &c. This is Christ’s fifth argument, 
and as S. Jerome says, forms a dilemma, from which it is impossible 
to escape, i. And plainly, this tree is Christ Make, i.e. t appoint, 
assert. Either approve and praise Me, together with My works, 
which seem to you to be laudable ; or condemn Me, with My 
works as a bad tree. He means, you, O ye Pharisees, praise My 
works, and yet condemn Me the author of them. But if ye praise 
the works, ye ought likewise to praise their author. Or if ye con- 
demn the author, ye ought also to condemn the works. Otherwise 
ye flatly contradict your own selves. 2. S. Jerome by tree under- 
stands the devil, to whom the Scribes attributed the works and 
miracles of Christ As thus, “ If ye praise My works, then ye ought 
also to praise the devil, to whom ye ascribe them; which is most absurd.” 

3. S. Aug. (Serm. 12. de Verb. Dom.), by tree understands the 
Pharisees themselves. If ye wish to be, and to be accounted good, 
do good works, namely, praise good men and good things. For if 
ye do evil, as in truth ye do, when ye condemn Me and My Divine 
works, ye must needs confess yourselves to be bad and wicked calum- 
niators, for a calumniator is known by his calumnies, as a tree is 
known by its fruit From hence S. Aug. gathers the moral argu- 
ment “First,” he says, “a man must be changed, that his works 
may be changed. For if a man remained in that which is bad, he 
cannot have good works : if he remain in that which is good, he 
cannot have bad works.” 

O generation of vipers , &c. Christ here calls the Pharisees vipers , 
for this special reason, that they, like vipers, uttered viperous words 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


102 


S. MATTHEW, XII. 


and calumnies, by which they endeavoured to defame Christ and cut 
Him off For they had a viper’s heart, that is a heart full of the 
poison of envy, pride, hatred and malice against Christ, from which 
they belched forth those viperous and deadly calumnies. 

Out of the abundance of the heart , &c.,*>., from that which abounds 
in the heart, which the heart often thinks about and loves, that , the 
mouth speaketh. If the heart, the mind and the will, abound in 
goodness and charity, a man speaks good and loving things ; if in the 
gall of malice and envy, he speaks words of gall and envy and bitter- 
ness ; as ye do against Me, O ye Pharisees. Whence S. Chrysostom 
says, " if the words spoken by them are so evil, how great malice, 
think ye, do they have in their hearts, where God is the only witness? 
Wherefore, when thou hearest a man speaking evil, much greater may 
you consider is the wickedness which his words demonstrate. For 
what is spoken outwardly is but the super-effluence of that which is 
within, with which he has vehemently attacked you. For if what is 
spoken by them is so evil, how great is the root of thought which 
imagines the words ? Do you wish then to know what anyone has in 
his heart, consider what he says ; what he has most frequently on his 
lips, for in that his heart abounds.” 

A good man , Ac. He explains the abundance of the heart by a 
treasure , that is, a heap and accumulation. A good man, therefore, 
from the good heap of good thoughts and affections which he accu- 
mulates in his mind, brings forth good words and works. But an evil 
man, from the evil treasure and heap of evil affections, brings forth 
evil words and works. Hear S. Chrysostom, “ He shows, either that 
the Jews themselves, blaspheming God, make manifest from what 
treasure house they draw their blasphemy ; or else, the sentence is 
connected with what went before, that as a good man cannot bring 
forth evil things, nor an evil man good things ; so neither can Christ 
do bad works, nor the devil good works.” 

But I say unto you, for every idle word .... give an account (Arab. 
an answer). Give an account , /.&, to Christ the Judge. Christ shall 
require of them an account of idle words; and if they are not able 
to render it, He will punish them. There is here a catachresis, as 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



IDLE WORDS. 




appears from the following verse. So SS. Hilary, Chrysostom, 
Jerome, and others. It is a Hebrew construction. For the 
Hebrews put the relative, with its antecedent, in the nominative case. 
The meaning then is, as S. Jerome says, “ If he who speaks an 
idle word, which by no means edifies the hearers, is not without 
peril to him who speaks it, and if in the day of judgment every one 
shall give an account of his words ; how much more shall ye, who 
blaspheme the works of the Holy Ghost, and say that I cast out 
devils through Beelzebub, give an account of your calumny ? Again, 
like idle words, so too every idle thought, wish, and action, is at 
least a venial sin.” 

You will ask, what is meant by an idle word t The Gr. is &py6v, 
as if &tpy6y> that is inert, without art and work, lacking fruit and 
utility . First, Theophylact and Euthymius translate idle, calum- 

nious. With them S. Chrysostom agrees, who says, “It is an idle 
word because it is false.” He adds, “Some say, because it is 
vain, such as gives rise to inordinate laughter : or shameful or im 
modest” 

a. And genuinely, an idle word is one that is vain, frivolous, 
ludicrous, which brings good neither to the speaker, nor to the 
hearer, even though it be injurious to no one, nor, in itself, repre- 
hensible. Thus S. Jerome, “ an idle word is what is spoken without 
profit either to the speaker, or the hearer, if omitting to speak of 
serious things we speak of what are frivolous and old wives’ fables. 
But a man who utters what is scurrilous, or anything immodest, 
will be accounted guilty, not of idle, but of wicked words.” S. 
Greg. {Horn. 6. in Evang. sub finem), says : “ An idle word is one 
which is devoid of right usefulness, or the reason of just necessity. 
Turn ye therefore your idle words into endeavours after edification. 
Consider how swiftly the time of this life passes away ; how swiftly 
the strict judge shall come.” S. Bern, says, in his sermon of the 
threefold keeping of the hand, the tongue and the heart : “ An idle 
word is one of which we can give no reasonable account, one which 
is without reason. Let none of us, brethren, think lightly of the 
time we spend in idle words. For now is the accepted time, now is 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


104 


S. MATTHEW, XII. 


the day of salvation. The word flies, and cannot be recalled. Time 
flies, and cannot be recovered , nor does foolish man consider what 
he loses. Let us chat, they say, to pass away the time. O mean- 
while the hour, the tune is passing away, which the mercy of thy 
Maker is giving thee to repent, to obtain pardon, to acquire grace, 
to gain eternal gloiy; the time is passing, in which you ought to 
propitiate the Divine mercy, to hasten to the society of the angels, 
to sigh for thy lost inheritance, to breathe after the promised felicity, 
to stir up thy weak will, to weep for the sins thou hast committed.” 
An idle word then, according to S. Bern., is one spoken without 
reasonable cause. Such therefore is not one which is spoken 
pleasantly, to console the afflicted, or to exhilarate those who are 
sick and sad. Neither is it one which teaches human wisdom, as 
when the words and deeds of others are related, with this end, that, 
from them, we may learn to act and speak prudendy. S. Basil goes 
further, and says that for a word not to be idle, a pious intendon 
is required. But he is speaking to Religious, whose profession calls 
them to deal with and speak of holy things. He says: “An idle 
word is one which is not for edifleadon in the Lord ; for such 
grieves the Holy Ghost.” For like as it is the part of a human 
being to act and speak according to the rule of right reason, and of 
a Christian according to the law of Christ, so it is the part of a Re- 
ligious to speak according to the dictates of religion and piety. 
Whence S. Bern, says : “ Thou hast consecrated thy mouth to the 
Gospel ; it is no longer lawful for thee to open it for jests.” 

1. Then a pious in tendon is not required absolutely, that a word 
should not be idle. It is sufficient that it should, in some manner, 
be conducive to use, and human prudence. For thus the sailor 
speaks of the winds, the ploughman tells of oxen. Were it other- 
wise, nearly every word of artificers, of merchants, and men of the 
world would be idle. 

2. Gabriel Vasquez (i. 2. disp . 52. in fine,) teaches that an idle 
word is not one uttered with this end only in view, that a man 
should give counsel with respect to any infirmity or want of nature ; 
As for example, if one should say, when he is cold, I am frozen ; I 
desire the fire, that I may drive away the cold. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



SPEAKING TO EDIFICATON. 


io 5 


This idleness of thoughts, words, and works is, as it were, a wasteful- 
ness of time and human actions, which, other things being equal, is 
worse than waste of riches and fortune. For a small portion of 
time has been given us by God, in which to provide for a blessed 
eternity : and every moment of it we may, by thinking, speaking, and 
acting well, be acquiring for ourselves the greatest degrees and 
treasures of glory and blessedness, all which treasures are wasted 
oy this idleness of words and works, as S. Bern, has rightly re- 
marked. Everyone is bound to do and say all things in such manner 
as that they may be fitly referred to God, that is to say, that they 
should be adapted to please and obey Him, according to those words 
of the Apostle, “ Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do 
all to the gloiy of God.” (1 Cor. x. 31.) Otherwise they are idle, 
/.*, useless for the final end of man. But for this it is required 
that they should be directed by right reason, and should be honest 
For everything that is honest, and nothing but what is honest is 
pleasing to God. 

God has given us a mouth, that we should pray to Him and praise 
Him ; and that we should speak what is useful and salutary to our- 
selves, or to our neighbours. But he who speaks what is idle and 
unprofitable, abuses his mouth, contrary to the mind and appoint- 
ment of God. “ For neither,” as S. Ambrose says (in Ps. cxix. Serm. 
22) “is it of small peril to speak of worldly and idle things, when 
we have such wonderful works of God to speak about. Let the 
righteous man be resolved to say with holy David, My tongue shall 
speak of Thy word, for all Thy commandments are equity (Vulg.) ; 
and thus let him shut out all idle words. 19 

From what has been said, it is plain that many idle things are 
done and said by most men, of which they will have to render an 
account to God. Wherefore, that they may provide a remedy 
against this evil, let them accustom themselves to do and say nothing 
without premeditation. In the second place, let them learn to speak 
sparingly, and only about good and useful things. 3. I^t them for 
some days collect their mind and thoughts, and consider seriously 
the actions, reasons, objects, and intentions of their life ; that if they 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



io6 


S. MATTHEW, XII. 


be depraved or idle, they may correct them, and aim at some defi- 
nite end for their whole life and all their actions, that in all they 
may seek God’s glory and their own salvation and perfection. More- 
over, let them each morning daily conceive this intention, and offer 
it to God, and frequently renew it through the day ; that thus they 
may gain a habit of referring all their words and actions to this end 
By this means they will at length always have this end (virtually) in 
sight, even though they may not actually think about it For a good 
intention changes our words and actions, so that from being indif- 
ferent or idle they become honest, holy, and are rewarded with 
heavenly glory. Cassian tells of the Abbot Machetes, who, when 
idle things were being related, fell asleep ; but, when spiritual things 
were spoken of, was always wakeful. He used to say that the devil 
was the author of idle words, and that he had found it out by the 
following proof : When he was discoursing about spiritual things, 
almost every one fell asleep ; by-and-bye if he related some idle 
tale, he saw them all wake up. This caused him to groan, saying. 
Who is the author of this, unless it be he to whom idle things are 
pleasing, spiritual things displeasing — that is, the devil ? 

For by thy words , &c. Not only of works, but also of words, 
must we have a great care, since of both account must be given to 
God. They are both the fruit of the same tree — that is, of the 
will — whether it be good or bad. Wherefore thy words, no less than 
thy works, shall justify thee, if they be righteous and holy ; or shall 
condemn thee, if they be depraved and perverse. They shall jus- 
tify, I say — that is, shall not only declare thee just, but shall also 
make thee just, or more just, if they proceed from the love of God 
and true repentance. But they shall condemn, and render thee 
liable to punishment, if they be idle, wanton, quarrelsome, and so 
on. For those who are condemned by Christ in the Day of Judg- 
ment shall be punished, not only on account of mortal, but also of 
venial sins ; yet, according to the gravity and desert of each, more or 
less severely. 

Then certain of the Scribes — a sign , &c. ; S. Luke (xi. 16) adds, from 
Heaven. These were some of those men who brought the false accusa- 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



THE SUBTERFUGE OF THE JEWS. 


107 


don against Christ, that He cast out devils by the help of Beelzebub. 
This is plain from S. Luke xi 16. When they had been refuted by 
Christ, because they did not wish to seem overcome and convicted 
of falsehood, they pressed Him to confirm what He said by a sign, 
that is, by some celestial miracle. As thus : Thou sayest that Thou 
workest miracles by the help of God ; if it be so, cause that God 
may attest that this is true by some sign from H eaven, by which He 
may signify that Thou art sent by Him, and dost cast out devils by 
His power. But the many diseases which were healed, the many 
dead who were raised up by Christ, with this object — that He might 
show them that He was the Messiah, sent by God the Father— ought 
to have been sufficient for them. But for the unbelieving and 
false accusers nothing is sufficient ; and if one thing be granted, 
they ask, as a subterfuge, another and another. The meaning is 
this : Thy miracles, O Christ, are in the earth and of the earth, but 
we wish to see celestial miracles in Heaven. For God, Whom Thou 
assertest to be the Author of these miracles, dwells in Heaven. 
Cause, therefore, that fire may come down from Heaven, as Elias 
did; or that the sky may flash with new and marvellous thunders 
and lightnings, as Samuel did (i Sam. vii. 10) ; or that the sun 
should stand still, as Joshua did. Thus S. Jerome : Tacitly, there- 
fore, they scoff at Christ’s miracles done on earth, as though they 
were tokens of Satanic influeuce ; and they tempt Christ, that they 
may falsely accuse Him. But although He had shown such a sign 
in Heaven, they would immediately have sought a subterfuge, and 
would have required some other sign. For this is the disposition 
of all curious and cavilling persons, especially infidels and heretics. 

He answered and said-— an evil generation — and, that is, but, &*c. 9 
generation (Gr. ytvta, Le., nation, race) adulterous , Le., faithless and 
unbelieving, because leaving God their husband to whom they had 
been betrothed by circumcision, they clave to the devil. Hence in- 
fidelity and idolatry are often called adultery by Ezekiel (cap. 16) and 
others. So Theoph. says, “ He calls them an adulterous generation, 
because they forsook God, and clave to the devil.” a Adulterous , #. e., 
degenerate from the faith and character of Abraham, Isaac and the 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


io8 


S. MATTHEW, XU. 


rest of the Patriarchs. For they believed in Messiah, but these 
would not acknowledge Him when He was present, and proving 
Himself by so many miracles to be Messiah. For Messiah was the 
husband of the synagogue of the Jews, and is now the Spouse of the 
Christian Church, as is plain from £ph. v. 32. For thus the Hebrews 
called spurious, i.e. f degenerate children, bene nechar , Le., strange 
children , or rather, children of a strange, that is to say, an adulterous 
father. 

But no sign, &c. This perverse n ationof thejews asks of me a 
sign from Heaven, but I will not give it a sign, except a sign from 
the earth, that is, from the deep. I will not grant to the Jews any 
other sign than what I formerly promised, when I said, “ Destroy 
this temple, and I will raise it up;” but He spake of the temple of 
His body (S. John ii. 19, 21). (He meant the sign of the Resurrection, 
which is the sign of the prophet Jonah, because it was pre-figured 
by Jonah.) For this Jonah clearly showed, who I am, why I died, 
why I am crucified, in respect of which they are offended ; in truth 
that I am Messiah, the Tamer of Death and Sin, the Saviour of the 
World, and the Lord of Heaven and Earth. For the keepers of the 
sepulchre told the Jews that Christ was risen from the tomb; the 
Jews themselves saw the empty sepulchre, and the Apostles proved 
Christ’s resurrection by many miracles. Wherefore many Jews at the 
time, and afterwards all nations, believed in Christ raised from death. 
For the Jews did not expect a humble and poor Messiah, but one 
who was rich and glorious. Such they beheld Christ in His Resur- 
rection, Ascension, and Mission of the Holy Ghost Whence they at 
that time acknowledged Him, and accepted Him as Messiah, accord- 
ing to what Hes aid in John viii. 28. When ye have lifted up the 
Son of Man, on the Cross, then ye shall know that lam He: for I 
shall rise gloriously from the cross and death. 

But the unbelieving Jews were likewise compelled to acknowledge 
that Christ was Messiah, for after His Resurrection He sent Titus 
and Vespasian, who destroyed Jerusalem and Judea, because of His 
unjust death at the hands of the Jews. Thus S. Chrysostom, for at 
that time there was a complete destruction of the nation, although 


Digitized by VjOOQ 



THE SIGN OF JONAH. IO9 

it still endures, and shall endure until the end of the world. A 
righteous and avenging God brought this upon them on account of 
their crowning wickedness in killing Christ This destruction is the 
most evident token that the Jesus whom the Jews put to death was 
the Messiah. Wherefore Christ brings forward this sign of Jonah, as it 
were a sign of the condemnation of the Jews by the Ninevites, for 
the Ninevites believed Jonah and repented, but the Jews would not 
believe Christ, and were therefore cut off Maldonatus thinks that 
Christ gave the Jews who sought a sign from Heaven, a sign from 
earth, that they might be condemned; for it behoved that they who 
sought a sign deceitfully should be confounded. 

For as Jonah was , &c., in the hearty Le., in the lowest part of the 
earthy within the earth, as the heart is within the human body. When 
Christ died upon the cross, as His body was placed in the tomb, so 
did His soul descend into the Limbus Patrum, which is near the 
centre of the earth. 

You will ask, how Christ was three days and nights in the sepul- 
chre and Limbus : for He was there only on Friday and Saturday 
nights, and rose at day-break on Sunday ? i. Alcuin (Z. de. Divinis 
Off. sec . de. Coena. Dom.) gathers from this place that Christ lay in 
the tomb three whole days and nights, or 72 hours, and consequently 
rose again at the end of Easter Monday. But this is certainly a 
mistake. The constant tradition of the church is that Christ rose on 
the Lord’s day. 

2. Greg. Nyssen ( Oral . 1 2 de Resume.) computes these three 

days to begin on Thursday. He is of opinion, that when on the 
evening of that day Christ instituted the Eucharist, He offered Him- 
self to God under the species of bread and wine by means of the 
unbloody sacrifice. The soul of Christ was separated from the body, 
but that this was done in a secret and invisible manner, and that then 
the soul of Christ went down to Hades, and that thus He pre-accom- 
plished His death, which the Jews were visibly to bring about on the 
following day upon the cross. But this, too, is an error. For there 
is really in the Eucharist the soul of the Living Christ, that is to say, 
in His body and blood contained under the species of bread and 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


no 


S. MATTHEW, XII. 


wine. It is there, I say, not indeed by virtue of the words of conse- 
cration, but by natural concomitance. For in the Eucharist there is 
Living Christ, with His Soul, even as He is outside the Eucharist 
Thus the Council of Trent defines (Sess. 13, sec. 2). It would have 
been otherwise if any of the Apostles had consecrated the Eucharist 
during the triduum of the Passion. For then the Body and Blood of 
Christ would have been in it separated from His Soul, for in this 
manner they were in Christ Himself now buried. For Christ was 
then dead, not alive. 

I say then, that the expression thru days and thru nights is here 
only a periphrasis and description of a natural day. The two in- 
tegral parts of such a day are day and night, or light and darkness. 
Christ makes use of this periphrasis because Jonah, His antitype, did the 
same. (J onah i. 1 7.) We must not understand that these days, are three 
artificial days as opposed to nights, as if during three days, in which the 
sun is above the horizon, Christ lay in the tomb ; for this was notthe 
case. You must consider these three natural days to be not whole 
days but parts of days, namely, the latter part of Friday ; when 
Christ being taken down from the Cross, was laid in the sepulchre, 
the whole of Saturday, and part of the Lord’s day. For although 
the Hebrews reckoned their civil days from one sun-rise to another, 
like the Chaldeans and the Persians (Beda de ration. temp.), yet 
they computed their sacred days, such as the Passover, from even- 
ing to evening. Thus S. Jerome, Theophyl., Euthym., and S. Aug. 
and commentators, passim, explain the meaning of these three days. 
Hence Christ is constantly spoken of as rising on the third day, or 
after three days, without any mention of nights. 

But in this place, according to this computation, there were but 
two nights in which Christ lay in the tomb, viz. Friday and Saturday 
nights, and yet three nights are expressly mentioned. Others there- 
fore answer more fully and plainly ; that these three days and nights 
are reckoned according to the Roman computation. For the Romans 
were at that time, masters of Judea, and had introduced their own 
methods of computing time in civil affairs. The Romans reckoned 
from midnight to midnight, as Christians do in their fasts and 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



VARIOUS RECKONINGS OF TIME. 


Ill 


festivals. (SeeMacrob. L. i. Satumi c. GelL L, 3. c. 2. Pliny. L. 2. r. 
77. and others ). According to this reckoning it is dear Christ remained 
in the tomb during a part of three days and three nights. He was 
buried on Friday before sunset; and was in the tomb until the 
midnight of that day. After that He was in the tomb during the 
entire day and night of the Sabbath; and from the midnight of 
Sunday for about six hours until that dawning of the Lord’s Day on 
which He arose. For the Passover was at that time about the 
equinox, when the days and nights are equal, each being about twelve 
hours long. But the Soul of Christ, immediately when He expired 
upon the Cross at the ninth hour, at three o’dock in the after- 
noon, descended into Limbus, and there remained with the Fathers 
until the dawn of Easter Day. Now that the Jews made use of the 
Roman method of computing time may be learnt as well from other 
things, as because they borrowed the four watches of the night from 
the practice in use among the Roman armies. ( See Matt. xiv. 25 and 
elsewhere .) Different nations had different methods of reckoning the 
beginning of the day. The Persians and Babylonians reckoned from 
sunrise to sunrise. The Athenians and Italians, from sunset to 
sunset. Astronomers from midday to midday. But the Egyptians 
and Roman priests reckoned from midnight to midnight : and this 
method has continued in the Roman Church. The Hebrews then in 
the time of Christ followed the method of the Romans, to whom 
they were subject Franc. Lucas teaches that the Jews did not com- 
pute their Festivals from midnight as Christians do. The explanation 
given above is that of S. Anselm, tn Loco . Isidore of Pelusium (Z. 1. 
Epist. 1 14 and 212), D. Thom., (3./. q. 46. art. 9), Suarez (3./. q. 
53. disp. 46. sect. 3. in fine.), and Baronius. (A. C. 34.). 

The men of Nineveh shall rise up, &c. That is to say the Nine- 
vites, who, with their king Sardanapalus, had thrown themselves into 
wickedness, and given themselves up entirely to the lusts of the 
flesh, when they heard Jonah thundering against them, and threaten- 
ing them with destruction, believed him, and did penance. They 
therefore, in the day of judgment, shall accuse and condemn the 
Scribes and the Jews who would not believe Christ, their God and 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


II* 


S. MATTHEW, XII. 


Lord, working so many miracles. They shall condemn them, I say, 
not so much in word as by their deeds, namely, by the example of 
their faith and repentance. It does not follow from hence that the 
Ninevites were saved ; for shortly afterwards they returned to their 
sins like a dog to his vomit (See what I have said in the Prefaces 
to Jonah and Nahum.) 

And behold a greater than Jonah is here. For Jonah was a prophet 
and a servant : Christ is Messiah and the Lord. Jonah, remaining 
alive in the fish, alive came forth : Christ rose again from death and 
the grave, and restored to life, came forth. Jonah preached un- 
willingly : Christ of His own accord. Jonah was a foreigner among 
the Ninevites : Christ was of the same race as the Jews. Jonah 
threatened the destruction of Nineveh : Christ promised the kingdom 
of Heaven. Jonah did no miracle : Christ did veiy many. All the 
prophets prophesied of Christ : none of Jonah. Jonah cried aloud, 
“ Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown Christ cried by 
His Apostles, “ Yet forty years and Jerusalem shall be destroyed by 
Titus.” Euseb. of Emissa (Horn. 2. de Pasch.), and S. Aug. (Epist. 
49. 6), have collected further analogies between Jonah and Christ. 

The Queen of the South shall rise , &c. Aegypt. The Southern 
Queen. Persian, Queen of Thema (Theman with the Hebrews and 
Orientals signifies the south). Ethiopic, Queen Aseb. The name, 
therefore, of this queen appears to have been Aseb , and to have been 
taken from the name of her kingdom, Saba, Sabcea. This is the 
opinion of some. But I maintain that Aseb is Ethiopic for the south, 
as Ethiopians at Rome have assured me. This is the Queen of 
Sheba, which is south of Judea (1 Kin. x.). Sheba, or Saba, is a 
country, and has two meanings. One Sheba was in the neighbour- 
ing Arabia; the other in remote Ethiopia, the capital of which was 
afterwards called by Cambyses Meroe, after the name of his sister. 
This queen is thought by many to have come from the Ethiopian, 
rather than the Arabian Sheba: because the Ethiopian Sheba was 
furthest off, and because Josephus calls her Queen of Ethiopia and 
Egypt Wherefore afterwards the knowledge of scripture, and of the 
true God of the Hebrews, remained among the Ethiopians. From 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


COUNTRY OF SHEBA. 


«3 

among them theie came to Jerusalem, to worship God 9 a eunuch of 
Candace, Queen of the Ethiopians. (Acts viii.) Pliny (Lib. 6, c. 29) 
says, that queens reigned over the Ethiopians, and bore the general 
name of Candace. Indeed, the Emperor of the Ethiopians, or Abys- 
sinians calls himself the Son of Solomon. For the Ethiopian tradition 
is that their queen was married to Solomon, by whom she had a son, 
from whom the Abyssinian kings, who are now called Prete-Tannes , 
are descended. Pineda, however, refutes this tradition. The 
Abyssinians add that this queen Aseb reigned in Tigris, which is the 
largest province of Abyssinia, and that her son was called Menile , or 
lihe 9 because he was very like his father Solomon. Thus Euthymius, 
Jansen, Maldonatus, Toletus, Barrad, and others, think this queen 
came trom Ethiopia; but others, with more probability, think she 
came from Saba, which is in Arabia Felix, where are the Homeritae, 
in whose country spices and gold as well as camels are abundant 
Again, she is said to have come from the uttermost parts of the earth; 
for Arabia Sabaea is distant from Jerusalem 606 leagues. It is, 
moreover, the furthest land in the direction of the Mare Indicum , or 
Arabian Gulf, for there the land ends, and the sea begins. Hence it 
is often called in scripture, a land very far off, as Jer. vi. Isaiah xliii. 
and elsewhere. Whence Nicephorus (/. 8 , c. 35) says, Arabia Felix 
is Sabaea, and its boundaries extend to the ocean. Thus SS. Jerome, 
Cyril, Theodoras, Salmeron and others, whom Pineda quotes and 
follows. 

To hear the wisdom of Solomon; and behold a greater than Solomon 
Is here. Christ speaks of Himself in the third person out of modesty. 
This comparison between the Jews and the Queen of Sheba has 
much emphasis, which is well brought out by Franc. Lucas. *The 
woman,” he says, “was a Gentile, not brought up in God's discipline, 
but immersed in the business of a great empire ; yet she was attracted 
by the fame of Solomon’s wisdom, and undertook a most difficult 
journey from the remotest parts of the earth to Jerusalem, that she 
might make trial of his wisdom. This wisdom she wondered at 
above measure, and received Solomon’s counsel, although he only 
discoursed concerning earthly things. But the Jews, the scholars of 
vol. 11 1 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


IT4 


S. MATTHEW, X1L 


the Divine Law, would not receive Christ the power of God and the 
wisdom of God, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and 
knowledge, the only teacher of the mysteries of eternal salvation, 
which had been hid from ages and generations, when He offered 
Himself to them, and asked and invited them to come to Him. 
Yea, they altogether rejected Him, although He gave them the most 
wonderful sign of the Resurrection. How much, therefore, did the 
Queen of Sheba excel the Jews ! and with what justice and with 
what power, will she, in the Day of Judgment, rebuke them to their 
face for their obstinate ingratitude, unbelief, and disobedience to 
Christ ! ” The same reasoning will apply to the Ninevites. There- 
fore let priests, religious and others, who are abundantly supplied 
with God’s grace, take heed that they use it rightly and diligently ; 
for otherwise, the more they have received, the more severely will 
they be punished. Yea, in the Day of Judgment, laymen will 
triumph over them, even as Heathens and Turks will upbraid bad 
Christians, because if they had had their graces, they would have 
lived far more holily and religiously. 

When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man , &c. Observe, Christ 
still continues to treat of the subject of demoniacal possession : for 
the possessed, whom He healed, were corporeally possessed by a 
demon, but the Scribes and the Jews, who reviled Christ’s miracles, 
were spiritually possessed. Christ here speaks parabolically, aftei 
the manner of the Syrians. The meaning is : As a man who is an 
exile wanders through arid and desert places, so the devil when 
driven by the law of God from man, that is to say, from you, O ye 
Jews, who were the people of God, amongst whom God dwelt, and 
manifested Himself by prophecies and miracles, wanders through 
desert places, and seeks rest But when he cannot find it save in 
man, and when he sees that ye despise God’s grace, which I offer 
you, then he eagerly returns to you as to a house that is empty and 
swept, as to a place prepared and adorned for him. Then he takes 
seven, i>., many other companions, more wicked than himself, and 
they joyfully inhabit that house, i.e., your souls ; and that they may 
not be again expelled, and that they may make you more wicked. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


THE HOUSE OF THE SOUL. 


“5 


with that object in view they cause you to blaspheme Me, My doc- 
trine, and My miracles, and to say that I cast out devils by Beelzebub, 
and that ye may at length crucify Me, which is of all wickedness the 
chief and the greatest Wherefore God will punish you with utter 
destruction by Titus, and will cause you to be without God, without 
Messiah, without law, or temple, or sacrifice, and without faith — yea, 
that ye shall think your own perfidy and blindness to be the true 
faith and the true light. 

Moreover, the house, that is the soul is empty, because it is without 
God, and devoid of His grace. It is swept with besoms ( Vulg.) 
because all virtue, piety and goodness have been driven out of it, and 
the poison of impurity has been scattered in it, and the tapestry of 
pride hung about it For such adornment as this is the adornment 
of undeanness, and is pleasing to the devil who delights in nothing 
but what is impure and filthy. 

Again, the devils are driven by God and His Saints into desert 
places, that they may not injure men. Thus Raphael bound 
Asmodeus in the deserts of Upper Egypt (Tobit 8.) So also Isaiah 
says, (Isaiah xiii. and xxxiv.) that Babylon should be wasted and 
rendered a desert ; and that hairy creatures , Satyrs and Onocentauri \ 
i. e. demons in the shape of goats and monsters should dwell there. 
But the devil does not find rest in such places, for, as Abul. says, 
“ The devil cannot rest, because he shall be tormented eternally, but 
he seeks the rest of his own evil will : for he is envious, and loves to 
injure men : and when he is able to injure them he rests after a 
fashion.” He acts thus, partly from envy, because he grudges man 
the happiness of heaven, from which he himself has fallen ; partly 
from hatred of God : and because he cannot injure God himself, he 
would injure man who is God’s creature and image, that he may thus, 
as far as he can, do an injury to God. 

Mystically , dry places are the souls of the Gentiles, in which, by the 
grace of Christ, the moisture of concupiscence is dried up. Hear S. 
Jerome, “ The unclean spirit went forth from the Jews, when they 
received the law, and being driven from them, walked in the wilder- 
ness of the Gentiles. But when the Gentiles had believed in the 

I 2 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


Il6 S. MATTHEW, XII. 

Lord — finding no place among them, the devil said, I will go back 
to the Jews.” 

And the last state of that man , &c. This is the end and scope of 
the parable. Christ shows that relapsing into sin is worse than 
falling into it at first ; even as a relapse into a disease of the body is 
worse than the original disease. S. Augustine says {Epist. 137), “ I 
confess unfeignedly, before the Lord our God, who is the witness of 
my soul, from the time when I began to serve God, that I have not 
found any who have made greater progress in religion than those in 
monasteries. So too, in like manner, I have never found worse men 
than those who have fallen, being monks. And this is why I believe 
it has been written in the Apocalypse (ch. xxii.) ‘ He that is just, let 
him become more just ; and he that is filthy, let him become more 
filthy/” Thus Lucifer, who was the most fair of all the angels, became 
the worst of the devils. So too Judas, from an Apostle, became an 
Apostate, and the betrayer of Christ So also Nestorius, Eutyches, 
Pelagius, Arius, and in our time Luther, Calvin, and the rest, their 
companions, from monks and priests, became apostates and here- 
siarchs. As it is commonly said, the best wine makes the sourest 
vinegar.” 

While He was yet speaking to the multitude , behold His mother , &c. 
You will ask, who were those who, in the Gospels, are called the 
brethren of Christ? The impure heresiarch, Helvidius, answered 
that they were children of the blessed Viigin who were born after 
Christ For he denied Her perpetual virginity. But S. Jerome 
sharply and learnedly refutes him, in the work which he wrote against 
him. 

2. The Greeks generally, with Euseb. (H E. ii. 1), and of the 
Latins, SS. Hilary and Ambrose, think that they were children of 
Joseph, by a former marriage. But Joseph never had any other wife 
except the Blessed Virgin Mary. Peter Damian {Epist. 11, c. iv. ad 
Nicol. Rom. Font.) says that this is the faith of the Church. 

3. Hugh of S. Victor thinks they were descendants of S. Ann, the 
mother of the Blessed Virgin Mary, and that S. Ann, besides Joakim 
the father of the Virgin, had two other husbands, of whom, those who 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


WHO WERE THE LORD’S BRETHREN. II7 

are called the Lord’s brethren, were begotten. But S. Hippolytus 
(Ap. Niceph. 2, 3) teaches that S. Ann had only one husband, Joakim. 
I say, therefore, that these persons were not properly the brethren of 
Christ, nor the offspring of the Blessed Virgin Mary, nor Joseph, nor 
S. Ann, but are called brethren, i.e., cousins or relations of Christ, 
by a mode of expression common in Hebrew. In sooth, they were 
cousins, or really brothers of S. Joakim, or S. Ann, or rather brother's 
children, or sister’s children of SS. Joakim and Ann, probably children 
of Cleophas, who was a brother of Joseph, the husband of the blessed 
Virgin Mary, according to the testimony of Hegesippus (Eus. ff E. 
iii. n). For Joseph and Cleophas were sons of Jacob, the brother 
of S. Anti. Hear S. Jerome on the passage, “ We, as it is in the 
book which we have written against Helvidius, say, that the Lord’s 
brethren were not children of Joseph, but cousins of the Saviour, and 
children of Mary, the maternal aunt of the Lord, who is called the 
mother of James and Joseph and Jude.” 

Stood without. They sent a messenger into the house, to Christ, 
to call Him out 

Seeking to speak with Him. Not out of ambition and pride, that 
they might appear to be relations of so great a Teacher and Prophet, 
as S. Chrysostom and Theophylact think ; but that they might take 
Him with them, and bring Him to Nazareth. For they said that He 
was beside Himself ( Mark iii. 21). “ For neither did His brethren 

believe in Him ” ( John vii. 5). Whether they said this because they 
really thought He was mad ; or feignedly, in order that they might 
deliver Him out of the hands of the Pharisees. That for some such 
cause the Blessed Virgin called Christ forth, no pious person would 
doubt But if they wished to take Him as a madman, they must 
have concealed their opinion from the Blessed Virgin Mary, and 
taken her with them that they might die more easily draw Christ 
away. For it is certain she knew perfectly that Christ was of sound 
mind. Wherefore she accompanied these brethren or relations of 
Christ from the desire of beholding Him. 

But one said to Him , Behold Thy mother, &c. This person was 
the messenger whom the brethren of Christ sent to call Him out. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


n8 


S. MATTHEW, XII. 


But he said: Who is My mothet , &c. Observe, Christ speaks thus, 
not as denying that He really had a mother, as if Christ were not a 
true man, but a phantasm bom of a phantasm, as Marcion and the 
Manichees taught; nor yet as though He were ashamed of His 
mother and poor brethren, but either because this messenger was 
interrupting Him with too great boldness and importunity, by calling 
Him away from the preaching which He had begun ; or rather, as 
S. Ambrose says, that He might show that He must be more intent 
upon the ministry given Him by His Father, than upon His affection 
for His mother ; and that He must prefer spiritual to carnal relation- 
ships, where there is neither sex nor rank, but all are most nearly 
related to Christ, and by every tie, as though they were father, sister, 
and brother. For this is what Matthew adds concerning Christ, And 
stretching forth His hand, &c. The Arab, trans., He pointed with 
His hand towards His disciples . 

For whosoever shall do, &c. Spiritually, as I have already said, not 
carnally. He speaks of brother and sister, because of either sex. The 
faithful soul is also the mother of Christ, because by teaching, exhort- 
ing, and counselling, she brings forth Christ in herself and others. 
Hear S. Gregory (Horn. 8 in Evang.), “We must know that he who is 
the brother and sister of Christ through believing, is made his 
mother by preaching. For he, as it were, brings forth the Lord, 
whom he infuses into the heart of his hearer." He subjoins the 
example of S. Felicitas, who by the spirit bore to God the seven 
sons, to whom she had given birth in the flesh, because she strength- 
ened them in persecution, and animated them for martyrdom. These 
words of Christ were also exemplified in S. Victoria, a virgin martyr 
under Diocletian. She said to the pro-consol, who asked her, “Wilt 
thou go with Fortunatianus, thy brother ? ” who was a heathen ; “No, 
for I am a Christian; and those are my brethren, who keep the com- 
mandments of God.” Wherefore she was shut up in prison, and. 
perishing by hunger, obtained the martyr’s crown. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



U9 


CHAPTER XIII. 

3 The parable of the sower and the seed : 18 The exposition oj it. 44 The parable 
of the tares, 31 of the mustard seed , 33 of the leaven, 44 of the hidden treasure , 
45 of the pearl, 47 of the draw-net cast into the sea : 53 and how Christ is con- 
temned of his own countrymen. 

T HE same day went Jesus out of the house, and sat by the sea side. 

2 And great multitudes were gathered together unto him, so that he went 
into a ship, and sat ; and the whole multitude stood on the shore. 

3 And he spake many things unto them in parables, saying, Behold, a sower 
went forth to sow. 

4 And when he sowed, some seeds fell by the way side, and the fowls came and 
devoured them up. 

5 Some fell upon stony places, where they had not much earth ; and forthwith 
they sprung up, because they had no deepness of earth : 

6 And when the sun was up, they were scorched ; and because they had no root, 
they withered away. 

7 And some fell among thorns ; and the thorns sprung up, and choked them. 

8 But other fell into good ground, and brought forth fruit, some an hundredfold 
some sixtyfold, some thirtyfold. 

9 Who hath ears to hear, let him hear. 

10 And the disciples came, and said unto him, Why speakest thou unto them 
in parables ? 

11 He answered and said unto them, Because it is given unto you to know the 
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given. 

12 For whosoever hath, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abun- 
dance: but whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken away even that he 
hath. 

13 Therefore speak I to them in parables : because they seeing, see not ; and 
hearing, they hear not ; neither do they understand. 

14 And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Esaias, which saith, By hearing ye 
< *hall hear, and shall not understand ; and seeing ye shall see, and shall not per- 
ceive : 

15 For this people’s heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing. 


Digitized by Google 


120 


S. MATTHEW, XIII, 


and their eyes they have closed ; lest at any time they should see with their eyes, 
and hear with their ears, and should understand with their heart, and should be 
oonverted, and I should heal them. 

16 But blessed are your eyes, for they see ; and your ears, for they hear. 

17 For verily I say unto you, that many prophets and righteous men have 
desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them ; and to hear 
those things which ye hear, and have not heard them. 

18 Hear ye therefore the parable of the sower. 

19 When any one heareth the word of the kingdom, and understandeth it not, 
then cometh the wicked one, and catcheth away that which was sown in his heart 
This is he which receiveth seed by the way side. 

20 But he that received the seed into stony places, the same is he that heareth 
the word, and anon with joy receiveth it : 

21 Yet hath he not root in himself but dureth for a while ; for when tribulation 
or persecution ariseth because of the word, by and by he is offended. 

22 He also that received seed among the thorns is he that heareth the word ; 
and the care of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches, choke the word, and 
he becometh unfruitful 

23 But he that received seed into the good ground is he that heareth the word, 
and understandeth it; which also beareth forth, some an hundredfold, some sixty, 
some thirty. 

24 Another parable put he forth unto them, saying, The kingdom of heaven is 
likened unto a man which sowed good seed in his field : 

25 But while men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat, and 
went his way. 

26 But when the blade was sprung up, and brought forth fruit, then appeared 
the tares also. 

27 So the servants of the householder came and said unto him, Sir, didst not 
thou sow good seed in thy fields from whence then hath it tares ? 

28 He said unto them, An enemy hath done this. The servants said unto him. 
Wilt thou then that we go and gather them up ? 

29 But he said. Nay ; lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the 
wheat with them. 

30 Let both grow together until the harvest : and in the time of harvest I will 
say to the reapers, Gather ye together first the tares, and bind them in bundles to 
burn them : but gather the wheat into my bam. 

31 Another parable put he forth unto them, saying, The kingdom of heaven is 
like to a grain of mustard-seed, which a man took and sowed in his field : 

32 Which indeed is the least of all seeds : but when it is grown, it is the greatest 
among herbs, and becometh a tree, so that the birds of the air come and lodge in 
the branches thereof. 

33 Another parable spake he unto them : The kingdom of heaven is like unto 
leaven, which a woman took, and hid in three measures of meal, till the whole was 
leavened. 

34 All these things spake Jesus unto the multitudes in parables ; and without a 
parable spake he not unto them 

35 That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying, I will 
open my mouth in parables ; I will utter things which have been kept secret from 
the foundation of the world. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



S. MATTHEW, XIII. 


121 


36 Then Jesus sent the multitude away, and went into the house : and his 
discipl es came unto him, saying, Declare unto us the parable of the tares of the 
field. 

37 He answered and said unto them. He that soweth the good seed is the Son 
of man: 

38 The field is the world : the good seed are the children of the kingdom ; but 
the tares are the children of the wicked one: 

39 The enemy that sowed them is the devil : the harvest is the end of the world; 
and the reapers are the angels. 

40 As therefore the tares are gathered and burned in the fire ; so shall it be in 
the end of this world. 

41 The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his 
kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity ; 

42 And shall cast them into a furnace of fire: there shall be wailing and 
gnashing of teeth. 

43 Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun, in the kingdom of their 
Father. Who hath ears to hear, let him hear. 

44 Again : The kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hid in a field ; the 
which when a man hath found, he hideth, and for joy thereof goeth and selleth all 
that he hath, and buyeth that field. 

45 Again : The kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchant man seeking goodly 
pearls; 

46 Who, when he had found one pearl of great price, went and sold all that 
had, and bought it 

47 Again : The kingdom of heaven is like unto a net, that was cast into the 
sea, and gathered of every kind : 

48 Which, when it was full, they drew to shore, and sat down, and gathered the 
good into vessels, but cast the bad away. 

49 So shall it be at the end of the world : the angels shall come forth, and 
sever the wicked from among the just, 

50 And shall cast them into the furnace of fire : there shall be wailing and 
gnashing of teeth. 

51 Jesus saith unto them. Have ye understood all these things ? They say unto 
him. Yea, Lord. 

52 Then said he unto them, Therefore every scribe which is instructed unto the 
kingdom of heaven, is like unto a man that is an householder, which bringeth 
forth out of his treasure things new and old. 

53 And it came to pass, that when Jesus had finished these parables, he departed 
thence. 

54 H And when he was come into his own country, he taught them in their 
synagogue, insomuch that they were astonished, and said, Whence hath this man 
this wisdom, and these mighty works ? 

55 Is not this the carpenter’s son ? Is not his mother called Mary ? and his 
brethren, James, and Joses, and Simon, and Judas ? 

56 And his sisters, are they not all with us ? Whence then hath this man all 
these things? 

57 And they were offended in him. But Jesus said unto them, A prophet is 
not without honour, save in his own country, and in his own house. 

58 And he did not many mighty works there, because of their unbelief 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


122 


S. MATTHEW, XIII. 


At that time , &c. Syriac* by the sea shore: When Christ, after His 
manner, had preached in the house, which He had hired for His 
dwelling in Capernaum, as I have said on c. iv. 13, He sent away 
the multitudes to attend to themselves and their affairs, and that He 
might refresh Himself and His disciples with rest and food. Bye 
and bye, since He knew that the multitudes were about to come to 
Him in such numbers that the house could not contain them, He 
went out to the wide, open shore of the Sea of Galilee ; and there 
uttered the following parables. 

He went up into a ship : from whence, as from a pulpit, He preached 
to the people assembled on the shore. 

A sower went out to sow . Gr. 6 axdpuv, Le., sowing. Observe : 
Appositely are gospel doctrine and preaching compared to seed, and 
the harvest proceeding from it. For, as for the natural harvest there 
is need of seed, earth, sun, rain and wind, so also is there need of 
such things for the spiritual harvest The seed is the word of God, 
or the gospel, and the preaching of it The earth is the free will of 
all who hear. The sun is preventing grace, illuminating and inflam- 
ing the free will, that it may receive the Word of God so as from 
it to produce the fruits of charity and all virtues. The rain is 
grace, watering and promoting these good acts and motions of the 
free will. The winds are temptations which, by agitating them, cause 
them to take deeper root, and strengthen them. Lastly, there is 
need of patience, Gr. wropovri, le., endurance in the labours and 
troubles of ploughing, sowing, &c, and long waiting for the reward 
and fruit of the harvest. 

Observe : the end and scope of this parable is, that Christ would 
teach that He Himself is the Sower, le., the preacher of the gospel 
upon earth, that is to say, among men, but with different results 
among different people. For, first, not all who hear the gospel accept 
it ; as seed, although sown in the earth, does not everywhere strike 
root in the earth. 2. Not all who believe persevere in faith, but 
some fall away under temptation ; like seed which sprouts in stony 
ground, quickly withers by the sun's heat 3. Not all, who persevere 
in faith, bring forth the fruit of good works ; just as thorns choke 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


APPLICATION OF THE PARABLE OF THE SOWER. 1 23 

seed springing up well in otherwise good ground, and prevent it from 
bearing fruit 4. These things happen, not through the fault of the 
seed, of the doctrine, but of the earth. It is the fault of the 
hearers, and that in various ways. It is partly on account of the 
rocks, partly on account of the thorns. The rock is the flesh, the 
thorns are the world, the highway is the habit of a worldly and licen- 
tious life, where the birds of the air, that is the devils, like most eager 
and voracious devourers of souls, snatch away the doctrine that has 
been preached, from the mind and memory, whilst they draw off those 
who are by the wayside, *>., men who are given up to the customs and 
business of the world, as well as those who are wandering, who are 
slothful and curious, from considering and penetrating into the doc- 
trine heard, to their accustomed vanities. 5. The seed in the good 
ground is that which those receive in a good heart, who begin to 
ruminate upon it, and profit by it ; they are in the best way, who 
apply themselves with all their might, to arrive at perfection in virtue. 
6. Some seed bears less fruit, some greater, some the greatest. That 
is on account either of the greater sowing, *'&, preaching and illumi- 
nation of spiritual things, and the assistance of grace, or on account 
of greater efforts and co-operation of free will with grace. This is 
the sum of the whole parable, from which it is easy to understand it 
in all its parts. I will handle them briefly, one by one. 

Maraiitcr: Let the preacher with Christ, who came forth from the 
house, even from heaven, impelled by the force of love, to the earth, 
go forth from the house of contemplation into the field of preaching, 
that what he has drank from God in prayer, he may pour forth upon 
the people ; and preach, not so much by words, as by the example of 
a holy life. Again, he invokes God that what he speaks in the ear, 
God may speak in the heart 

And as he sowed, some fell by the wayside , namely, on the path or 
boundary, conterminous with the field, which is constantly worn and 
trodden down by the feet of passengers, and is therefore unsuitable 
for the reception of seed, and exposes it naked, to be carried off by 
the birds. We see a gradation here, for from the unsuitable ground 
for seed, He rises gradually to the less unsuitable, to the more suit 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


124 


& MATTHEW, XIII. 


able, and the most suitable. The most unsuitable earth for seed is 
that by the wayside. The less suitable is the rocky ground. The 
more fit is the good ground which produces thorns. The most fit is 
that which is entirely good, rich, moist earth. Moreover, the way is 
a mind worn, and dried up by evil thoughts. Such a mind does not 
receive the doctrine of the gospel, which is contrary to its lusts ; it 
does not perceive, nor understand it, because it is wholly intent upon 
fleshly allurements. Whence, says the Gloss, such are those, who 
neither are pricked by preaching, nor begin to do well 

But other fell on stony ground, &c. This seed could not strike 
deep root, therefore it began to germinate and spring up before the 
proper time. For that which is quickly produced, quickly perishes. 
He adds the cause. 

When the sun was risen , they were scorched, Gr. Uav^arladij, i.e., 
were burnt up, both seeds and germs, by the burning heat of the sun. 
And because they had no root, they withered away. They had but 
a little earth, which was succeeded by the rock. Hence, partly from 
want of moisture, partly by the burning rays of the sun, they were 
dried up. The rock in this place, says Rabanus, means the hardness 
of an insolent mind, in which there is no deep mildness of an 
obedient soul Whence, such are only pleased by the sweetness of 
the word, which they hear, and of heavenly promises for a short 
time ; but they strike not the root of desire unto salvation. There- 
fore by the heat of the sun i.e., the fury of persecution, are they burnt 
up, through impatience, because their mind does not firmly cleave to 
the word of God, and they lose the greenness of faith, says the Inter - 
linear . S. Chrysostom says, “ With regard to souls, that which is 
rock, may become good ground, that which is wayside, not trodden 
down ; and the thorns may be destroyed. Christ was speaking to 
all, even as if He were providing for the future, how He might declare 
what I ought to do, and have not done. Hereby He teaches His 
disciples not to be slothful.” 

But other fell among thorns, &c, Le., in land producing thorns. 
And they grew, Gr. hvif}rioav, Le., they ascetided, Le., they grew more 
quickly than the good seed, which rises slowly, and by degrees. Foi 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



HEARING EARS. 


i*5 


tares spmig up easily, wheat with difficulty. Therefore the tares 
choked the wheat just as it was coming into ear. The tares did this, 
both because they drew away the moisture and nourishment to their 
own roots ; as well as because they deprived them of air and room to 
grow. 

Bui other fell on good ground, &c. (Arab.) For one a hundfed, for 
one sixty , and for another thirty . Good ground, if it be well culti- 
vated, for one grain produces a hundred ; other ground, less rich, 
sixty ; other, more sterile, thirty. The good ground is a faithful and 
devoted conscience. 

Observe, only the fourth part of the seed, namely, that which fell 
on the good ground, produced fruit ; the three other divisions of the 
seed perished. Thus, but few profit by the word of preaching. By 
far the greater number who hear the word bring forth no fruit 

He that hath ears of hearing (Greek) let him hear . Christ makes 
use of this expression when the subject is obscure and symbolical, or 
when he would arouse the attention of his hearers. Ears to hear : 
He speaks of one who hears diligently the words of Christ, in order 
that he may receive them, and ruminate upon them, and obey them. 
For many heard Christ out of curiosity, for the sake of listening to 
something new. Such had not ears for hearing. So, even now, 
there are many who hear sermons for the sake of their eloquence — 
not that they may amend their lives. 

And the disciples , &c. They meant to say, the uninstructed 
multitudes do not receive parabolic and symbolic discourses. Why, 
then, dost thou not speak to them in plain words, that they may 
understand them ? 

He answered and said, &c. (Arab), ye have been endowed with the 
knowledge of the mysteries of the kingdom of Heaven, and they have not 
been endowed The reason why Christ spake to the multitude in 
parables was, because many among them were as yet unfitted for 
receiving the heavenly doctrine of the Gospel ; and some, indeed, 
did not believe — yea, some derided. The scribes also reviled 
Christ, and accounted Him for a false prophet. Wherefore they had 
not ears of hearing such as Christ required. Christ, therefore, urges 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



126 


S. MATTHEW, XIII. 


them to take hearing ears, and examine carefully His parables, and 
ask from Him the meaning of them, that thus they may make 
themselves fitted to receive the preaching of the Gospel This if 
they would do, He promises clearly to expound what He speaks in 
parables. 

Moreover, Christ indicates that this capability of receiving the 
Word cannot be obtained by our own power, but must be humbly 
asked of God. For this is the gift of God, which He gave to the 
disciples of Christ, and did not give to the rest, but left them in 
their blindness. It is as though He said, “ Yours, O ye Apostles, is 
this grace and happiness, that God has given you faith in Me, and 
that, for this reason, I clearly tell you of mysteries, whilst I speak to 
others only in parables. For faith is the gift of God. Do ye, there- 
fore, render perpetual thanks to God for this, and pray for others, 
that God would give them ears of hearing, as He has given you. 
For then will I explain My parables to them, as I shall explain them 
to you.” Whence Mark has (4, xl), To them which are without , all 
things are done in parables . That is, to the unbelieving who are 
outside of faith and of the Church, all things are spoken and done 
by Me, parabolically, i.e., obscurely, by symbols and enigmas, that 
they may not despise and cavil at them, for as Bede says, “ Not only 
the things which the Lord spoke, but also the things which He did, 
were parables,” t\e., signs of mysteries, hidden from the unbelieving 
Jews, according to the words, “Give not that which is holy unto the 
dogs, neither cast your pearls before swine.” Mark adds, that seeing 
they may see y and not perceive, &c. He means, they are blinded and 
obstinate, and thus they persevere in their blindness, and will not 
accept the light of truth, which I offer them. For this blindness is 
the punishment of past sins, which they have committed. All this 
will be more plain from what follows. 

Observe : the word that, as Mark says, that seeing they may see, 
and not perceive, does not signify cause and intention, but consequence 
and effect. For Christ, in speaking parabolically, did not intend 
absolutely to blind them, but only to permit what was the conse- 
quence of His parables — namely, that the Jews, being blinded with 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


NEED OF FAITH. 


127 


envy and lust, although they saw so many miracles of Christ, and 
heard His heavenly wisdom, yet would not believe, nor understand 
what they saw and heard, but would be as though they had neither 
seen nor heard. 

For he that hath } &c. ; Arabic, And he who has anything, \ it shah 
be given and added \ & c. The sentence is a species of proverb, as 
Salmeron and others say. It is most true : for to the rich things are 
given, from the poor there is always taking away. Similarly, God 
heaps upon His faithful and elect people (such as the Apostles were) 
new graces and benefits day by day, so that they abound in virtue 
and holiness: but from the unbelieving, the ungrateful, and the 
unworthy, He gradually takes away His gifts, both of nature and 
grace. 

The meaning is : 1. He who has faith, to Him shall be given the 
knowledge of the mysteries of God’s kingdom ; for these cannot be 
known without faith. He, therefore, who hath not faith, from him 
shall be taken away the good which he hath. As though He said, 
To you, O ye Apostles, because ye believe in Me as the Messiah, it 
is given to hear the mysteries of God and of Heaven, by means oi 
which ye are every day advanced more and more in hope and the 
love of God. But from the Scribes, who will not believe in Me, 
God will take away the little knowledge which they do possess of 
heavenly things. Yea, he will deprive them of Church, kingdom, 
priesthood, and country ; and, as profane and perfidious, they will 
wander in misery over the whole earth. Thus SS. Jerome and 
Hilary and Euthym. explain. 

2. They who have ears of hearings who come to Me with sincere 
affection, with a pure desire of faith and truth, to them I will clearly 
reveal celestial verities ; and I will assist them in the path of virtue, 
by which they may arrive at the kingdom of God. But they who 
have not this pure desire of the truth, but indulge in their own lusts 
and errors — as ye do, O ye Jews and Scribes— from them shall be 
taken away, by degrees, that little knowledge of Divine things which 
they do possess, and they shall become wholly blinded. Therefore, 
to you, O ye Jews, I, Christ, speak not cleaily, but darkly m parables. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



128 


S. MATTHEW, XIII. 


As Theophylact says, “ For he who hath a small spark of goodness, 
and does not stir it up by means of the Spirit and spiritual things 
must of necessity have it extinguished.” 

3. S. Augustine (lib. 1, de JDoctr . Christ c. 1) explains the word 
have to mean use, and applies it to preachers. Thus, the preacher 
who has doctrine — i.e., who uses the doctrine given him by God, and 
diligently preaches it, and communicates it to others ; — doctrine and 
words, which he may speak and preach, will never fail him, for God 
will suggest them. But if anyone does not make use of doctrine, he 
will gradually forget it and lose it In the same manner, the word 
have means to use in c. xxv. 29. Thus we find by experience that 
zealous preachers, the more they preach, the more they abound in 
word and spirit; like fountains, from which however much water 
flows, just as much do they always receive. 

Therefore 1 speak unto them , &c. Behold how Christ here plainly 
declares the reasons why He spoke to the Jews and Pharisees in 
parables. It was because they had been previously unwilling to 
hear, i.e., to understand, obey, and believe Christ when He spake 
plainly of repentance and the way to the kingdom of Heaven. They 
deserved, therefore, that Christ should speak to them obscurely and 
by parables. For He taught at Capernaum — where were rich mer- 
chants, who trusted in their riches ; where also were Scribes and 
Pharisees ; these men despised, yea even derided and blasphemed, 
Christ’s heavenly doctrine concerning contempt of riches, humility, 
poverty, and penance. Wherefore, Christ purposely betook Himself 
to parables, which (forasmuch as they did not understand them) 
they could not deride. Therefore He spake unto them in 
parables ; not because they were absolutely reprobate, but because 
they were unworthy and ungrateful Thus SS. Hilary, Chrysostom, 
and Bede. Nevertheless, I confess there were intermingled with 
this multitude of unbelieving Jews many who were desirous of hear- 
ing Christ for the sake of salvation; but because they were mixed 
up with the unbelieving, who were Christ’s enemies, it was given to 
them to hear only in parables ; that by them, even when they did 
not understand them, they might at least conceive admiration and 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


HOW GOD HARDENS. 


I29 


reverence for Christ, which would at length lead them on to a better 
position. Yea, as S. Chrysostom says, to all the Scribes and 
Pharisees, unworthy and obstinate? as they were, Christ spake in 
parables, with this intention and this end in view — that He might 
instil into them a sincere desire of searching and believing in Christ, 
and that having suffered a temporary obscurity in parables which 
they did not comprehend, they might the more eagerly desire Christ, 
the true light, and ask of Him the explanation of the parables. This 
is hinted at in Mark (iv. 33). 

And with many parables He spake the word unto them , as they were 
able to bear it f that (namely) they who were able to understand and 
receive them, might receive them ; but they who could not, might be 
stimulated to search out the meaning. 

For this peoples heart is waxed gross , &c. He cites Isaiah (vi. 9, 
10), where instead of make fat, our translation has, blind thou — i.e., 
thou shall blind (Chaldean, infatuate ) the heart of this people. The 
Hebrew is pwn, hashmen, Le., make gross , or fat their heart , and 
make heavy their ears. Where observe that this blinding, making 
gross and hardening, is spoken of God deserting and leaving in his 
blindness the man who is made blind and hardened ; as well as of 
the man who, of his own free will, blinds, makes gross, and hardens 
himself, by cleaving to his darkness and his sins, and shutting his 
eyes to the Divine light and the doctrine of Christ Where the 
LXX (which the Vulgate follows) reads with different points, husche - 
man, and translate with a dearer meaning— /A? heart of this people 
has been made gross, namely, directly by themselves, indirectly by 
God; especially because the preceding words signify, that they had 
not been so much blinded by God as by their own covetousness, 
pride, malice, hatred and envy against Christ. See what I have said 
on Isaiah vL, where I have expounded the passage at length. 

But blessed are your eyes, for they see (Arabic, see through), &c. 
Eyes and ears of the mind as well as of the body. Blessed are ye, 
O ye Apostles, because ye receive the mysteries of the kingdom of 
heaven, both with the exterior eyes and ears of the body, and the 
interior ears and eyes of the soul With the eyes of the body ye 
VOL. 11. k 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



S. MATTHEW, XIII. 


130 

behold My sacred actions and miracles : but, what is of far more 
consequence, with the eyes and ears of your minds, enlightened by 
God, ye believe and understand* the same. This do not the Jews : 
for the soul, equally with the body, has its own eyes and ears — yea, 
the soul is all eye or ear. 

Verily, I say unto you, that many prophets , &c. For, as Christ said 
(John viiL 56), “ Abraham rejoiced to see My day ; he saw it and 
was glad.* Here is the voice and prayer of Jacob : “ I have waited 
for Thy salvation, O Lord * (Gen. xlix. 18). Then also Isaiah xlv. 
8 : “ Drop down dew, ye heavens from above, and let the clouds 
rain the righteous one. Let the earth open and bring forth the 
Saviour.” (Vulg.) There was the same feeling and desire to all 
the patriarchs, all the prophets, all the saints of the Old Testament 
— namely, to see and hear Messiah, the Redeemer, Teacher, and 
Saviour of the world. 

It is said that S. Augustine had three wishes : the first to see 
Christ speaking in the flesh ; the second to behold Rome in the 
splendour of an imperial triumph ; the third, to hear Paul thundering 
forth in his preaching. Many have the same wish at this present 
time. 

Hear ye therefore, & c. Cometh the evil one, Gr. h Tcovrjpo c, that is, 
the devil. S. Luke (viii. 12) gives this more clearly, The seed is the 
Word of God. Those by the wayside are they that hear: then someth 
the devil , and taketh away the word out of their hearts , , lest they should 
believe and be saved. 

Appositely is the word of God, or the gospel, and the preaching of 
it compared to the sowing of seed. 1. Because as the word from the 
mouth of the preacher, so is seed scattered by the hand of the sower. 
2. As the word is received by the ear and the heart of the hearer, so 
is seed received into the bosom of the earth, that it may produce 
fruit. 3. As seed is the parent and origin of all com, so is the word 
of God the parent of all good works. 4. As the earth without seed 
produces only nettles, tares and thorns, so also does the mind of man 
without the word of God produce nothing but what is vain and 
noxious. 5. As seed, in order that it may fructify, must be sown in 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



HOW TO PRESERVE SEEDS. 


I 3 1 

ground neither hard nor stony, dry or thorny, but in moist or good 
earth, so also the word of God ought to be received in tender, pure 
hearts, and inclined to piety, that it may bring forth spiritual fruit : 
this is what James says (i. 21), “ receive with meekness the engrafted 
word.” 

Again, Palladius (L 1 de re Rust. 7 U. 35) suggests a remedy to 
prevent seeds being destroyed by moles, mice, ants, &c., that the 
seeds should be previously steeped in bitter substances. So also 
Pliny says that chick-peas keep caterpillars from herbs, and adds, “ if 
the seed of herbs be steeped in the juice of wormwood, it will keep 
the herbs from all noxious animals.” In like manner, in order that 
we may keep the seed of God’s word in our hearts, untouched by the 
gnawing of pleasures, it must be macerated by sobriety, fasting, and 
other austerities, for these preserve the mind from the corruption of 
fleshly delights. 

6. As the earth ought to be ploughed, manured, harrowed, that 
the seed may germinate, so also ought the heart of man to be cleared, 
and cultivated by laborious acts of penance, mortification and other 
virtues, that the word of God may produce fruit in it This is what 
Isaiah says (xxxii. 20.) “ Blessed are ye which sow beside all waters, 
sending forth thither the feet of the ox and the ass.” See what is there 
said. 7. In order that seed may germinate, it requires the rain and 
the sun ; so also that the word of God may strike root in the soul, it 
ought to be watered by grace, and warmed by heavenly love. This 
is what Isaiah says (lxi. 11), “For as the earth bringeth forth her 
bud, and as the garden causeth the things that are sown in it to spring 
forth : so the Lord God will cause righteousness and praise to spring 
forth before all the nations.” This is effected by the word of the 
Gospel scattered by Christ and His Apostles. 8. As seed that is 
sown in the earth, must decay, burst and die, that it may be fruitful : 
so also that the word may fructify in the heart it must be, as it were, re- 
solved, bruised, and die by meditation ; and it must likewise bruise 
and mortify the heart itself, according to that saying of Christ (John xii. 
24.) “Verily, verily, I say unto, Except a com of wheat fall into the 
ground and die, it abideth alone : but if it die, it bringeth forth much 

£ 2 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



13 * 


S. MATTHEW, XIII. 


fruit” Thus likewise must the faithful soul suffer many adversities 
before it can bring forth fruit unto God. 9. The seed must first 
strike root in the earth, then spring up in stalks and branches, next 
bud into flowers, and lastly, produce fruit from them ; so also must 
the word of God first be rooted in the soul, then bring forth the germs 
of good thoughts, and the flowers of good desires, that it may at 
length produce the fruit of good works. 10. The entire power of a 
tree or plant is in the seed : for from it the plant and all its parts and 
members, which it possesses in an analogous maimer to the limbs of 
men and animals, proceed. Wherefore many think that seeds have 
souls, as Aristotle hints (/. 2. de gener. anim . c. 1.) For when seed 
is cast into the earth, by and bye, as though it were living, it produces 
living germs. In like manner the whole force of virtue and perfec- 
tion, whereby a man becomes spiritual, holy, and perfect, is contained 
in the word of God, as it were in seed. And this, unfolding itself and 
germinating in the mind produces all virtuous actions, n. Different 
seeds produce different fruits ; as the seed of a pear tree produces 
pears ; the seed of wheat, wheat ; the seed of barley produces barley, 
and soon. Thus different sentences of the Gospel bring forth different 
affections in the souL The precepts of humility bring forth humility, 
the precepts of repentance, repentance. 12. As there is a father and a 
mother of every child, as for the production of fruit, there must be 
the earth and the seed ; so in like manner, for good works there must 
be the concurrence of the word of God with that which is internal, 
i.e., the free will of man, which must co-operate with the word of God. 
But this must be in such manner that the will must derive all its 
power of producing spiritual works from the word and grace of God, 
in order that they may be pleasing unto God, and may merit eternal 
life. (Cone. Trident, sess. 6.) In like manner the fruit derives liberty, 
or that it should be a free work and not compulsory nor done of 
necessity, from free will. For the interior word, which God speaks 
in the soul, stirring it up and strengthening it for acts of penance, 
charity, religion, &c, is nothing else but the grace of God itself illu- 
minating the understanding, and strengthening the affection, or the 
will, and inflaming it to the Divine works of virtue. This interior 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


THE WAY SIDE. 


*33 


word, or grace, God is wont to add to the external word of preaching. 
What therefore the preacher speaks outwardly in the ear, God must 
speak inwardly in the heart if it is to bear fruit 

In fine, as from the better seed, and the more excellent land is 
produced better fruit, for example, better wheat, better barley, so in 
like manner from the more powerful preaching, and the grace of God, 
and the more fervent co-operation of free will are produced more ex- 
cellent acts of virtue, and more heroic works. Hear what Pliny says 
(/. 24. 18.) He prescribes the following rules for sowing. 1. Let 
the sowing in moist places be performed quickly, the reason is that 
the seed may not putrefy with the wet : more slowly in dry ground, 
that the rain may follow, lest it should lie too long, and not be able 
to germinate. 2. It is part of the art of sowing to scatter the seed 
evenly. The hand ought to correspond with the step, and always 
with the right foot 3. The seed must not be transferred from cold 
places to warm, not from ground where it ripens quickly to ground 
where it ripens late. 4. Sow abundantly in rich soil, more sparingly 
in poor soil. 5. This precept should be observed, do not exhaust 
your crops ; for as Columella says, it is evident that crops will become 
exhausted by sowing the land too frequently with them. All these 
things are mystically adapted by preachers for sowing the Gospel. 

And understandeth it not y does not perceive the meaning of the 
Word of God; because some other occupation, desire, or care, or 
the devil himself, distracts the mind to think of other things. This 
is he who is sown by the wayside . The heart of such a man is signi- 
fied by that portion of the ground which is by the wayside, or the 
path itself. For as seed falling in the way, or by the side of the 
way, is rejected by the hard and trodden ground, and is snatched 
up by the birds ; so, in like manner, the seed of the Word of God is 
not received into a heart which has become hardened by a habit of 
sin, but is immediately carried away by the devil impelling the heart 
to its accustomed sins. Such an one, therefore, cannot really be 
compared to ground at all, but to a way; he has the name and 
character, not of a hearer, but of a despiser of the Word of God. 

Now the inaptitude for seed of land trodden down in a way may 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



134 


3. MATTHEW, XIII. 


be removed, if it be cultivated by the plough and the mattock ; and 
if a hedge be placed so as to exclude those who tread it down. 
Thus, likewise, the unfitness of a heart that is hardened by habits 01 
vice may be taken away by compunction, which may cut and mollify 
the hardness of the heart : and if it be broken by the mattock of 
continence which weakens vicious desires, and brings them into 
subjection to right reason and the law of God. 

But hath no root in himself, &c. This is the second condition of 
those who receive the Word. It is better than that condition of 
ground which preceded ; for this is ground sufficiently soft for the seed 
to be received, and to sprout, though it is only for a short time. 
The meaning therefore is, The heart of that hearer who hears the 
Word of God, and with joy receives it in his mind, meditates upon 
it, and approves of it — according to those words of the Psalmist, 
“The statutes of the Lord are right, and rejoice the heart” — is like 
the seed sown on stony ground. This seed quickly springs up, that 
is, in pious affection for the faith, and other works of religion. But 
because there is only little earth in the heart, and much rock — that 
is, because there is more of a depraved habit in a heart that has 
become hardened by pleasures than of a disposition to piety — this 
seed of God's Word is unable to take deep root in such a heart. It 
is temporary, it is not constant in the faith, but only believes for 
a little time, as the Arabic translates. It perceives the Word of God 
to be opposed to its lusts and vices ; so that, like hard and rocky 
ground, it rejects it Whence Luke says (viiL 14), These are they 
who for a time believe, and in time of temptatum fall away ; i.e., from 
the Word and faith of God, or, certainly, from His law, which faith 
declares is to be followed. Wherefore, when tribulation arises from 
private persons, or public persecutions which tend to deprive them 
of life, or the riches and pleasures which they love ; and when this 
is in consequence of the Word and faith of God, immediately they 
are scandalized, or as the Syriac translates, they are offended, and fall 
away, or apostatize from the profession of the faith. S. Gregoiy 
gives an example (Hon t. 15 in Evang .) : “ The rocky ground had no 
moisture, because it did not bring what it had caused to sprout to 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



THORNS. 


* 3 $ 


the fruit of perseverance. For many persons, when they hear the 
Word against avarice, hate the same avarice, and praise contempt of 
all things ; but by-and-by, when the mind sees what it desires, it 
foTgets what it praised. Many, when they hear the Word against 
luxury, not only do not desire to perpetrate fleshly pollutions, but 
are even ashamed of what they have perpetrated; but as soon as 
the fair appearance of the flesh is present to their eyes, the mind is 
carried away, and they are as though they had never made resolu- 
tions against those desires. For often we have compunction for our 
faults, and yet, after weeping, return to the same faults.” 

But that which is sown among thorns , &c. This is the third 
sort or condition of ground receiving seed, far better than the second 
condition, in as much as thorns offer less hindrance than rocks to 
seeds to germinate. This ground then denotes the heart of a 
hearer, which is beset with riches and worldly cares, as it were thorns. 
These destroy and choke the growing seed of the word of God, 
before it can bring forth the ripe fruit of virtue. Observe : riches 
are aptly compared to thorns, because like thorns they distract, prick, 
and torment the mind so that it is not pleasing to a rich man to think 
often of Divine things. 

Hear S. Jerome: “To me it seems that the words spoken literally 
to Adam, Among thorns and thistles thou shalt eat thy bread, signify 
mystically, that whosoever shall give himself up to the pleasures and 
cares of this world, shall eat heavenly bread and the true food, among 
thorns.” 

And S. Gregory (Horn. 15. in Evang.)\ “Who would ever believe me 
if I wished to interpret thorns to mean riches, especially since the 
former prick, the latter give pleasure ? And yet riches are thorns, 
because they lacerate the mind with the punctures of their thoughts, 
and when they draw to sin they inflict as it were a bloody wound.” 

Care of the world, i.e., of things temporal, such as the care of a wife 
or family. Such things tear the mind, i.e., distract, trouble, and wound 
it But on the other hand the care of salvation and of things 
divine causes the mind to be collected, calm, sound and flourishing. 
Hear S. Gregory, The cares of the world choke, because they strangle 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


136 


$. MATTHEW, XIII. 


the throat of the mind with importunate thoughts : and because they 
will not suffer good desires to enter the mind, they as it were cut off 
the breath of life. We must observe also that there are two things 
which Christ joins to riches, namely cares and pleasures : because in 
truth the mind is oppressed by care, and by abundance it becomes 
dissolute. 

Deceitfulness , i.e. the seduction of riches. Riches are deceitful, 
because they draw away the mind from God and salvation, to vain 
and hurtful wealth, which is often a cause of many sins and of dam- 
nation, when it is acquired by all sorts of means. They are deceitful 
therefore, because they promise and perform not They promise joy 
and pleasure, but instead they often hurry men into the eternal pains 
of hell. 

Hear what S. Gregory says, “riches are deceitful because they can- 
not long abide with us, and because they do not drive out the poverty 
of our souls. Those only are the true riches which enrich us with 
virtues. If therefore, brethren beloved, ye desire to be rich, strive 
tor the heavenly kingdom. If ye love the glory of dignities, hasten 
to be enrolled in the senate of the Angels, which is above." 

That which is sown in the good ground , &c. “ The good ground,” 
says S. Thomas (in Catena ex Remigio) : “The good ground is the 
faithful conscience of the elect, or the mind of the saints, which 
receives the Word of God with joy and desire and devotion of heart, 
and manfully keeps it in prosperity and adversity, and leads it on to 
the future, whence it follows, ‘ and brings forth fruit, some an hun- 
dredfold, some sixty, and some thirtyfold.’ ” 

Understandeth it, &c. ; f>., considers it in his mind, ruminates 
upon it, penetrates it, proves, tastes, retains it The fruit is that 
• both of good works as well as of their corresponding reward and 
glory in Heaven. Whence Luke adds, with patience, , Gr. iv vvofiovy, 
i.e, with long-suffering, after the manner of a husbandman patiently 
awaiting, after his sowing, the fruit and heavenly harvest of his 
labours and good works. “The good ground," says S. Gregory, 
“brings forth fruit through patience. The grapes are trodden by 
the heels of men, and flow into wine-juice ; olives are expressed by 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


DIFFERENT DEGREES OF FRUIT. 


137 


beatings, and leave their lees, and produce the fatness of olive oil ; 
by the threshing of the floor the grain is separated from the chaff, 
and when winnowed is carried into the granary, and so on.” Hence 
S. Bonaventura says, that a good hearer of God’s Word gives himself 
up entirely to it, together with all the faculties of his soul, namely, 
his understanding, his will, or affection, and his memory. He serves 
the Word of God with his understanding and will, because he receives 
it in an honest and good heart : with his memory, because he retains 
the word : with his powers of working and endurance, because he 
brings forth fruit with patience. 

And brings forth some an hundredfold \ &c. " We must observe,” 

says S. Jerome, “ that like as in the bad ground there were three 
different sorts — namely, by the wayside, the rocky, and the thorny 
places — so in the good ground there is a threefold diversity. And in 
the one as well as in the other, it is not the substance which is 
changed, but the will ; and so it is the heart of the unbelieving as 
well as of the believing which receives the seed.” 

Moreover, the greatest fruit of God’s Word, as it were the greatest 
fruit of seed is a hundredfold, as if from a single grain a harvest of 
a hundred grains were gathered, as was Isaac’s case (Gen. xxvL 1 2). 
The medium fruit is called sixtyfold; the lowest thirtyfold. A 
definite number is put for an indefinite ; otherwise He might have 
added, brings forth some fortyfold , some twentyfold , and so on. 
Whence, in opposition to Jovinian and Calvin, the inequality of 
merit, and consequently of the reward, of good works in Heaven is 
rightly proved. So S. Chrysostom ( Horn 45), S. Augustine (de S. 

Virgin, c. 46), Nazianzen (Oral. 28), and others. For the Fathers, 
however Calvin may deride and exclaim, apply these words especially 
to diverse states. 1. S. Jerome, on this passage (lib. 1, contra Jovin), 
and S. Athanasius (Epist. ad Ammon.), and others assign the hundred- 
fold fruit to virgins ; the sixtyfold to widows ; the thirtyfold to those 
who live in honest and holy wedlock. 

2. S. Cyprian (/. de Hab. Virg.) and S. Augustine (/. 1, de quest. 
Evang. quest. 9, tom 4) assign the hundredfold to martyrs, the sixty 
to virgins, the thirtyfold to those who are married. Hear what S. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


3. MATTHEW, XIII. 


138 

Augustine says : “ I assert that the hundredfold belongs to martyrs, 
on account of their holiness of life, or contempt of death ; the sixty 
fold to virgins, on account of interior quiet, because they do not 
need to fight against fleshly habits — for rest is wont to be granted 
to soldiers who are past sixty years of age; the thirtyfold to the 
married, because thirty is the age of warriors — for those have a 
sharper conflict, that they may not be overcome of lust” 

3. Euthymius and Theophylact assign the thirtyfold to beginners, the 
sixty to those who have made some progress, the hundredfold to the 
perfect. So also Nazianzen {Or at. 28.) When a man proceeds, saith 
he, from thirty to sixty, he finishes with a hundred, as Isaac did (Gen. 
xxvi.) And he sings the Psalms of Degrees, going from strength to 
strength, and placing the Ascensions in his heart (Ps. 84.) 

Another parable put He forth , &c. The Syriac adds, enigmatically. 
This means, it is done in the kingdom of Heaven in the same way 
that it is done in a field — when a man sows his seed, and his enemy 
sows tares over it Wherefore Mark has (iv. 26.) So is the kingdom 
of God \ as if a man east seed into the earth , and while men slept, &c. 
For the whole parable is compared with the whole of the things 
signified, not part with part : for otherwise the sower would not be like 
to a kingdom but to a king, the King of Heaven. 

Whilst men slept \ &c. That is to say by night, whilst men were 
sleeping, his enemy came unknown to everyone. He was envious 
of the prosperous crops of his rival, and in order to ruin them, he 
sowed tares among them. The expression, whilst men slept , adds to 
the elegance of the parable : for those who are envious are accus- 
tomed to frame such plots against those who sleep. 

Symbolically , S. Jerome and S. Augustine understand this sleeping 
to mean negligence and carelessness on the part of bishops and pastors 
of the Church. Or they understand it of the death of the Apostles, 
on which the heretics took occasion to sow the tares of their heresies 
and wickednesses. Hence let pastors learn to watch over their flocks. 
“ The life of mortals is a watch.” For as Augustine says, “ To sleep 
more than to watch is the life of dormice rather than of men.” 

Tares, the Hebrew Gospel reads, charulim . i.e., nettles. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



TARES. 


139 


thistles. The word in Greek is zizania, , a word peculiar to the Gos- 
pels, unknown to Cicero and Demosthenes, and signifying every kind 
of worthless and noxious weed. All impurity in seed is called 
zizania, as S. Augustine says. Tertullian (de prescript, hard. c. 31.) in- 
terprets zizania, to mean wild oats. “ In the parable,” he says, “ The 
Lord first sowed his good seed, and it was afterwards that the devil 
sowed the spurious seed of his barren crop.” Whence he gathers 
that the fact of heresy being later in time is a mark of falsehood. 
Hence too (/. de anima c. 16.) he calls the sower of tares “the 
nocturnal interpolator of evil seed.” 

Zizania then, or tares are whatsoever is injurious to the crops, or 
inimical to wheat, as darnel, for instance. Hear Pliny (/. 18. c. 17.) 
“ I should reckon darnel and thistles and thorns and burrs, no less 
than brambles, among the diseases of the crops rather than among 
the pests of the ground.” Some are of opinion that zizania is a 
Syriac word. Other derive it from the Chaldee zyz, an appearcuue, a 
figure. For it has the appearance of nourishing corn, but is not. 
The Germans call zizania, droncacert, because it makes people drunk : 
it also gives vertigo and stupefaction to those who eat it. Hence 
zizania signifies mystically heretics and sinners, especially those who 
corrupt others by word or example, as SS. Augustine, Chrysostom, and 
Gregory teach. For zizania injure the wheat, and choke and kill it, 
because they draw away nourishment from it, and so as it were corrupt 
and strangle the wheat This is Christ's second parable of the tares, 
by which He tacitly rebukes the Scribes and Pharisees, His adver- 
saries, who sowed the tares of their false accusations over the seed 
of the Word of God, i.e., His preaching of the Gospel, by saying 
that Jesus was opposed to Moses, that He had a familiar spirit, and 
so on; by which they inferred that Jesus was not the Messiah, but a 
magician and an impostor. By this means they turned away the 
people from Him and His Gospel, and choked and destroyed the 
good seeds and desires of faith and piety which Christ had scattered 
in their hearts. Therefore they were tares, i.e., the evil seed of the 
deviL 

When the blade was sprung up, &c. For the first sprouts 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



140 


S. MATTHEW, XIIL 


of zizania and of wheat are alike, so that one cannot be discerned 
from the other; but when they are grown up, they are easily 
distinguished 

Servants of the householder, \ &c. Lest ye root up the wheat also with 
them, . For the tares are intertwined and interwoven among the 
roots of the wheat, so that if you were to pull up the former, you 
must root up the latter also. This parable Christ will expound, 
verse 31. 

The kingdom of Heaven is like to a grain of mustard seed \ &c. 
Instead of the birds of the heaven lodge in the branches of it the Arabic 
has they are overshadowed by its branches . This is Christ's third 
parable, the occasion and cause of which S. Chrysostom gives as 
follows : “ Because the Lord had said that of the seed three parts 
perish, and one is preserved, and again of that which is preserved, 
there is great loss on account of the tares which are sown above 
it, lest people should say, who then and how many will believe ? he 
removes this fear by the parable of the grain of mustard seed, and 
therefore it is said, Another parable put He forth unto them } the 
kingdom of Heaven is like unto a grain of mustard seed \ &c.” 

You will enquire in the first place, what it is which is here com- 
pared to the kingdom of Heaven, and likened to a grain of mustard 
seed? 1. S. Hilary understands it of Christ Himself. He says, 
“ The Lord compares Himself to a grain of mustard seed, which is 
very sharp and the least of all seeds, and whose virtue and power are 
increased by bruising and pressure. After this grain had been sown 
in the field, when it was taken by the people and delivered to death, 
as though in a field by a sort of sowing, there was the burial of its 
body, it grew above the measure of all herbs, and exceeded the 
glory of all the prophets. For like a herb the preaching of the 
prophets was given to Israel as being sick : but now in the 
branches of the tree, raised from the ground on high, the birds 
of the air dwell : by these we understand the Apostles, lifted up 
by the power of Christ, and they overshadow the world with their 
branches. To them the Gentiles flew for the hope of life ; and when 
they are vexed with whirlwinds, that is by the blasts of the devil, 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


MUSTARD SERI). 


141 

they rest as in the branches of a tree. ” In like manner S. Gregory 
(lib. 19. Moral, c. 11.) expounds this whole parable, “ Christ Him- 
self is the grain of mustard seed, who was planted in the sepulchre of 
the garden, and rose again a mighty tree. He was but a grain 
when He died ; a tree when He rose again. A grain through lowliness 
of the flesh; a tree by the power of His majesty. A grain, because we 
saw Him, and there was no comeliness; but a tree because He was fairer 
than the children of men. The branches of this tree are sacred 
preachers. And let us see how widely they are spread. For what is 
spoken concerning them ? Their sound is gone out into all the earth, 
and their words unto the end of the world The birds rest in their 
branches, because holy souls who lift up themselves from earthly 
thoughts by the wings, as it were, of virtues are refreshed after the 
fatigue of this life by their words and their consolations.” You will 
say, how can Christ be called the kingdom of Heaven, when He is 
not the kingdom, but its King? It is replied : as a king is as it were 
the head in a kingdom, so a kingdom is as the body of a king. 
Wherefore a king represents the whole state or kingdom. Hence 
according to the rule of Ticonius, often in Scripture what belongs to 
the Church, which is the kingdom of Christ, is attributed to Christ, 
and via versa. 

2. More plainly and aptly, the kingdom of Heaven and the grain 
of mustard seed are the Church, especially the Primitive Church. 

You will enquire, (2). Why the Gospel is compared to a grain of 
mustard seed, and what are the resemblances between the two things ? 
I answer, the first is that Christ by this parable intends to signify 
the immense power and fruitfulness of Evangelical preaching, inso- 
much that what had a very small beginning with Christ, and by a 
few Apostles, diffused itself over the whole world. For a grain of 
mustard seed is less than all seeds , i.e. } the least of all seeds ; as the 
Syriac and Arabic have it The Greek is fUKpbrtpov tclvtw mnpfjL&rvy, 
i.e. y less than all seeds , meaning very little . This must be understood 
according to the common usage of speech, by which we call what is 
very little, or one of very small things, the least ; for otherwise to 
speak precisely, poppy seed, and the seed of rue, and of some other 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


8. MATTHEW, XIIL 


I4» 

herbs, is less than mustard seed. Thus the preaching of the Gospel 
by Christ and the Apostles was at first very circumscribed. 

2. A grain of mustard seed, especially in Syria, grows into a tree, 
so that birds dwell — Syriac, build their nests — in its branches. Thus 
the Gospel grew, and filled the whole world, so that the birds oi 
Heaven, /.<?., men lofty in knowledge and understanding as well as 
kings and princes dwelt in its branches. (See Dan. iv., 9 and 19)1 
Some understand by the birds, the angels, because they have wings, 
and are very swift Hear S. Augustine {Serm. 33 de Sane). “ Peter 
is a branch; Paul is a branch ; blessed Laurence, whose festal day 
we are celebrating, is a branch. All the Apostles and martyrs of the 
Saviour are branches ; and if anyone will bravely lay hold of them, 
they will escape being drowned in the waves of the world. He who 
dwells under their shadow shall not feel the fire of hell, and shall be 
secure from the storm of the tempest of the devil, and from being 
burnt up in the day of judgment” 

3. And chiefly by mustard is denoted the igneous force and efficacy 
of the Gospel “ Pythagoras,’' says Pliny (/. 20, c. 22), *• considered 
that mustard holds the chief place amongst those things whose force 
is borne upward; since there is nothing which more thoroughly 
penetrates the nose and the brain.” A grain of mustard refers to the 
fervour of faith, says S. Augustine. 

4. Mustard seed must be bruised ; for when it is bruised it emits 
its igneous force and flavour. Thus the preaching of the Gospel was 
as it were, bruised by a thousand oppressions and persecutions, which 
the Apostles suffered ; and then it breathed forth its igneous force 
and strength. 

5. Mustard seed, as Pliny says, is sharp and biting. It draws 
tears, purges away phlegm and cerebral secretions ; it is masticated 
for toothache ; when bruised and mixed with vinegar it is applied 
to the stings of scorpions and the bites of snakes ; it is an antidote 
to the poison of fungi ; it is beneficial for the breast and lungs ; it is 
useful against epilepsy, dropsy, asthma, lethargy, and many other 
diseases. Thus the Gospel expels poisons, that is sins, by the emetic 
of confession ; it is sharp and biting, because it teaches penance and 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



SPIRITUAL MUSTARD SEED. 


M3 


the cross ; it excites the tears of compunction ; it is medicine for all 
the faculties of the soul, and especially it dries up concupiscence, and 
animates to virtue. " The bitterness of its words is the medicine of 
souls," says S. Augustine. 

6. Mustard seed by its sharpness seasons food, and renders it 
palatable. So also the Gospel renders palatable everything which is 
hard and difficult by means of the example of Christ, and by the 
hope of future glory which it promises. 

S. Augustine says, “ A grain of mustard seed is great, not in ap- 
pearance, but in virtue. At first appearance it seems small, worthless, 
despised, not possessing savour, nor odour, nor sweetness ; but when 
it is bruised, it sheds abroad its odour and exhales nourishment of a 
fiery taste. It is so inflamed with the fervour of heat that there 
might be enclosed in it so much fire, by which men could (especially 
in the winter-time) drive away cold, and warm themselves inwardly.” 
After this he applies the qualities of mustard to the Gospel and the 
Christian faith, thus : "Thus too the Christian faith, at first sight, 
appears small and worthless, not manifesting its power, not carrying 
any semblance of pride, neither furnishing grace. But as soon as 
it begins to be bruised by divers temptations, immediately it mani- 
fests its vigour, it indicates its sharpness, it breathes the warmth of 
belief in the Lord, and is possessed with so great ardour of divine 
fire, that both itself is hot and it compels those who participate to be 
fervent also. As the two disciples said in the Gospel, when the Lord 
spoke with them after His Passion, "Did not our hearts bum 
within us by the way, while the Lord Jesus opened to us the Scrip- 
tures ?* A grain of mustard, then, warms the inward members of 
our body, but the power of faith bums up the sins of our heart. 
The one indeed takes away piercing cold; the other expels the 
devil's frost of transgressions. A grain of mustard, I say, purges 
away corporeal humours, but faith puts an end to the flux of lusts. 
By the one, medicine is gained for the head ; but by faith our spiri- 
tual Head, Christ the Lord, is often refreshed. Moreover, we enjoy 
the sacred odour of faith, according to the analogy of mustard seed, 
as the blessed Apostle saith, " We are a sweet savour of Christ unto 
God.” 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 





S. MATTHEW, XIII. 


Tropologically ; All these things may be applied to a faithful soul, 
and especially to an Apostle, and to a suffering Christian, or to a 
martyr. Wherefore the Church adapts this parable to S. Laurence, 
as the Gospel for his festival As S. Augustine says, in the work 
already cited, “We may compare the holy martyr Laurence to a 
grain of mustard seed ; for he, being bruised by various sufferings, 
deserved to become fragrant throughout the whole world by the 
grace of his martyrdom. He, when he was in the body, was humble, 
unknown, and held in low estimation ; but after he had been 
bruised, tom, and burnt he diffused the odour of his nobleness in 
the churches in all the world. Rightly, therefore, is the comparison 
applied to him. For Laurence, when he suffers, is inflamed. The 
fervour of its attrition moves the one ; Laurence breathes forth fire 
in his manifold tribulations. Mustard, I say, is cooked in a small 
vessel; Laurence is roasted on the gridiron by the fiery flame. 
Blessed Laurence the martyr was burnt outwardly by the flames of 
the raging tyrant, but he was inflamed inwardly by the far greater 
fire of the love of Christ.” The Arabians have a proverb — “ A grain 
of pepper is more powerful than many large gourds ; ” because if it 
be bruised it emits a fiery force, and makes itself felt in everyone’s 
nostrils. You may say the same of a grain of mustard. A believer, 
therefore, should be a grain of pepper or mustard, and breathe 
everywhere, and upon all, a divine fire, and so pepper all men, and 
make them like himself zealous that is, and ardent in the love of 
God. 

Another parable, &c. This is Christ’s fourth parable, of leaven, 
by which (as by the former parable) He shows the power and efficacy 
of the preaching of the Gospel As S. Chrysostom says, “ Like as 
leaven communicates its own virtue to a great quantity of meal, so 
shall ye, O ye Apostles, transform the whole world.” S. Chrysostom 
observes, with regard to the word hid: “ Thus also ye, when ye shall 
be subjected to your persecutors, shall overcome them. And as 
leaven indeed is buried but not destroyed, but by degrees transforms 
everything to its own state ; so shall it happen with your preaching. 
Do not ye, therefore, fear, because I said, Many troubles shall happen 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


LOVE 18 LEAVEN. 


MS 


' onto you ; for by this means shall ye shine, and shall overcome all.’ 1 
You will ask why Christ compares the Gospel to leaven? I reply , 
because leaven is a portion of the meal that has become a little 
sour, which takes place through fermentation. Hear how Pliny 
describes the manner in which leaven is made (/. 18, c, 1 1) : “ Now” 
(because formerly it was made in another way, as he had related a 
little before) “ leaven is made of the meal itself, which is first 
kneaded before salt is added, after the manner of pottage, and left 
until it becomes a little sour. Commonly, indeed, they do not warm 
it, but only make use of what has been kept from the day before. 
And evidently it is the nature of heat to cause fermentation ; as of 
bodies that are nourished with fermented bread to become stronger. 
Thus it was, that among our ancestors the greatest healthiness was 
attributed to the heaviest wheat.” 

Again, leaven, although it be small in bulk, with its heat moistens 
the whole mass of dough ; and as it were effects a change in its entire 
substance. It makes it palatable and digestible, so that it becomes 
wholesome bread for nourishing, sustaining and strengthening man. 
In like manner the Gospel by means of a few Apostles, who suffered 
many tribulations, converts the whole world to itself and makes the 
heart of each to be warmed with the love of God The woman who 
kneads is the Church, or the power and wisdom of God, says S. 
Augustine. 

Theologically. S. Augustine says, “Christ calls love leaven, 
because it excites to warmth. The woman he calls wisdom. By the 
three measures of meal we may understand either these three things 
in man — the whole heart, the whole soul, and the whole mind ; or 
the three degrees of fruit-bearing, an hundred, sixty, and thirty fold ; 
or the three sorts of men, represented by Noah, Daniel and Job.” (/. i. 
q. q. Evang. q, 12.) Rabanus adds, " He says until the whole was 
leavened : because charity being hid in our minds ought to grow there 
until it transmutes the whole mind into its own perfection : that 
which is begun here, is perfected hereafter.” 

S. Ambrose says, that like as leaven is disseminated through the 
whole mass of the meal, being as it were broken up ; “ so Christ was 
VOL. IL l 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


146 


S. MATTHEW, XIII. 


broken, tom and disolved by His various sufferings : and His moisture^ 
that is His precious Blood was poured out for our salvation, that it 
might by mingling itself with the whole human race, consolidate that 
race, which lay scattered abroad.” See also S. Chrysostom, who says 
among other things, “ If twelve men leavened nearly all the meal of 
the world, consider diligently in your minds, how great must be our 
wickedness and sloth, who, although we are so many, are not able to 
convert the remnant of the Gentiles, when we ought to be sufficient 
for a thousand worlds.” S. Boniface, the Apostle of Germany, was 
wont to weep over the same thing. His was the saying, “That 
formerly priests of gold celebrated in chalices of wood, but now 
wooden priests celebrate in golden chalices.” 

Three measures : a measure was equal in quality to a bath which is 
a liquid measure, containing an Italian bushel, or as S. Jerome and 
Josephus say, a bushel and a half. The measure contained three 
Attic bushels. 

These three measures are the quarters of the world, Asia, Africa, 
Europe. These were designated by the three sons of Noah. For the 
posterity of Shem inhabited Asia \ the posterity of Ham, Africa ; and 
of Japhet, Europe. So Csesarius, brother of S. Gregory Nazianzen. 
(Dial. 4.) 

Symbolically; S. Hilary says, the grace of the Gospel was hid in the 
Law, the Psalms and the Prophets ; now it hath appeared in the faith, 
hope and love of the Holy Trinity, that what the Law constituted, 
and the Prophets announced, the same might be fulfilled by the advent 
of the Gospels. Or as others say, that it might be confirmed by the 
threefold work of God, viz. of creation, redemption and glorification. 

Allegorically : S. Bernard, (/. 5. de Consider .) says the Blessed Virgin 
joined and united in her womb the three natures of Christ, namely 
soul, body and divinity to the one Hypostasis of the Word. 

All these things spake Jesus in parables , meaning in a parabolical 
manner : things kept secret , Heb. ntrn cht'doth, $\ e. enigmas , as the 
Chaldee trans. and S. Jerome (Ps. lxxviii. 2.). The Arabic has, 1 
will speak things hidden before the foundation of the world. Christ 
cites the psalm of David, lxxviii 2, who, according to the letter. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


HEBREW FOR PARABLE. 


*47 

through the whole psalm, celebrates God’s benefits to the Synagogue, 
ue. y the people of Israel, from the beginning, i. e. from their going 
forth out of Egypt under Moses their leader, until David’s own time, 
in order tliat he might stir up the people to be grateful to God, and 
to love and worship Him. But mystically, says S. Jerome, David 
was there a type of Christ, who celebrates the benefits granted by 
God through Himself to His Church, and before-time hid. These 
things were concerning the promised land in heaven, mysteries 
declared by parables. Observe that the Hebrew word for parables is 
mashal, which signifies any weighty and famous saying, such a one as 
predominates over others. For mashal means to rule : thus it came 
to signify what was obscure and recondite, whether it were an enigma, 
an allegory, a parable, or a sentence properly so called. Therefore 
the sentences in that seventy-eighth Psalm are not properly parables, 
but only weighty sentences. But here there are like weighty sen- 
tences and parables properly so called. Thus this verse of the Psalm 
applies to Christ in both its meanings, but to David in only one of 
them. For in Scripture many things are spoken which are more 
suitable to the things signified by the allegory, than to the allegory 
itself and its literal meaning. 

When the multitudes were sent away , &c., . . . declare unto us 

the parable of the tares. For this seemed more obscure than the 
others, and to contain severer threats. 

The field is the world, &c The field is the world \ not the Church , 
for by the tares of this field many understand heretics, who are not 
in the Church, especially when they are public and manifest. 

Children of the kingdom : These are faithful, righteous, and perse- 
vering in justice, and therefore elected by God to be heirs of the 
kingdom of Heaven. Whence, in verse 43, they are called the 
righteous . These are the sons of the Heavenly Father, “ which were 
bom not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, 
but of God.” (John i. r3). 

Observe : the righteous are here called seed , because although ihe 
seed which Christ sows is the Word of God, spoken as well outwardly 
by the lips, as inwardly in the heart by grace ; nevertheless, because 

i. 2 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



148 


S. MATTHEW, XIII. 


che fruit of this seed is the conversion of the faithful, and their 
justification, therefore the righteous also are called seed, the fruit 
of the seed, and the harvest. 

But the tareSy &c. Gr. viol tov xonjpov, i.e. f the sons of that wickedy 
namely the devil: thus the Syriac and Arabic. Therefore they them- 
selves are evil, for the offspring follow their father. As the sons of 
God are good and divine, so are the sons of the devil wicked and 
diabolical. 

Observe : by tares and children of the wicked one, some under- 
stand heretics, because they are the most injurious kind of tares, 
inasmuch as they choke and destroy the faithful and faith from their 
foundation. So S. Chrysostom, Euthymius, and S. Augustine (/. 
quest in Matth. q. n) who, however, retracts (/. 2 Retract, c. 27) and 
teaches from S. Cyprian, that tares denote all the wicked in the 
Church. SS. Gregory, Ambrose, and Theophylact teach the same. 
For all wicked persons, by their evil life, hurt the faithful and the 
Church, as tares injure wheat, and choke it Falsely then from this 
passage (verse 29), where Christ forbids these tares to be plucked up, 
and subjoins, Let both grow together , the Innovators infer that heretics 
are not to be punished and extirpated. For by parity of reasoning 
they might conclude that murderers and thieves must not be punished; 
for they too are tares. And I say that Christ does not here absolutely 
forbid these tares to be plucked up, but says that no one must 
attempt to root them all up together \ nor at a time when they cannot 
be distinguished from the wheat ; or when there is danger of pulling 
up the wheat at the same time with them. But all this does not 
apply when anyone is a manifest heretic, especially if he teaches and 

infects others with his heresy. For such a one does more harm to 
the Church than a murderer, for the one only kills the body, but 
the other the soul. See 1 Cor. v. 13, GaL v. 12, where the Apostle 
commands impious persons, especially false teachers, to be taken 
away and extirpated. Thus Origen and S. Augustine — the latter 
indeed was at first of opinion that heretics ought not to be put to 
death, yea, that they ought not even to be compelled to resume the 
faith which they have professed in baptism. But afterwards, when he 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


THE HARVEST. 


M9 


had been taught by experience how perverse and obstinate heretics 
are, he changed his opinion and taught the contrary. He says, “ I 
had not yet learnt either what great wickedness they would venture 
upon, if they could do it with impunity ; or how much careful dis- 
cipline could effect to make a change in them for the better." (I 2, 
amt. Parmen. c. 2, and 2 Retract, c. 5). 

The harvest, &c. For then shall God by the angels reap the 
harvest of all men, bad as well as good ; and shall sever them in the 
day of judgment, gathering the good into the heavenly bam, and 
delivering the evil to the fire of hell. Whence it follows that separa- 
tion shall be effected by the ministry of the angels. Therefore it is 
said below, that the Son of Man shall come to judgment with the 
angels. 

And shall gather out of His kingdom all things that offend; Gr. 
scandals, stumbling-blocks. The wicked, whom Christ previously 
called tares, and children of the devil, He here calls scandals; because 
they are, by their wickednesses, a cause of offence and rain both to 
themselves and others. S. Chrysostom observes, that the twofold 
punishment of the wicked is here signified — the pain of loss (in that 
it is said, they shall collect out of His kingdom), because they shall 
be shut out of Heaven ; and of sense, in that it is said, and shall cast 
them into the furnace of fire. S. Chrysostom adds : “ See the un- 
speakable love of God to man I He is prompt to bless them, slow 
to punish. When He soweth, He soweth by Himself ; but when 
He punishes, He punishes by others : for this latter work He sends 
His angels.” Christ adds, in verse 30, bind them together in bundles, 
which S. Gregory explains thus : “ The angel-reapers bind the tares 
in bundles for burning, when they join like with like in similar tor- 
ments — as the proud with the proud, the luxurious with the luxurious, 
liars with bars, unbelievers with unbelievers — that they may bum 
together.” 

And shall cast them, & c. The furnace denotes that the damned 
shall be confined in hell as in a furnace, as wood and straw are con- 
fined in a furnace. 

Then shall Uu righteous, &c. Then, because now, says Remigius 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


S. MATTHEW, XIIL 


l S° 

the just shine for an example to others ; but then they shall shine as 
the sun for the praise of God. He alludes to Daniel xii 3 : “ They 
that are learned (Heb. mascilim, Le., wise and prudent — such, namely, 
as shall live wisely and prudently) shall shine as the splendour of the 
firmament ; and they that shall instruct many to justice, as the stars 
for everlasting eternities.” See what I have there said From this 
passage some heretics were of opinion, that in the resurrection our 
bodies will be transformed into globes, so as to be like the solar orb. 
The emperor Justinian ascribes this heresy to Origen, and condemns 
it. (See Baronius, tom. 7, A . C. 538, pp* 289 and 293.) 

The kingdom of Heaven is like t &c. For he who knows that a 
treasure is lying hid in any place, and buys the place, becomes the 
master of the treasure, and is not bound to point it out to the former 
owner, but may use his knowledge for his own advantage by buying 
the field for as much as it is worth by common estimation ; with 
vhich the hid treasure has nothing to do. 

Which when a man has found. The Greek has the Aorist, 

£Vph>V. 

Observe : Christ, in the preceding four parables (namely, of the 
Sower, of the Seed, of the Grain of Mustard, and of Leaven) has 
declared the nature, power, and efficacy of the Gospel ; now, in the 
two following parables, of the Treasure, and of the Pearl, He declares 
its price, how great it is, that all things are deservedly counted as 
loss in comparison of it So SS. Chrysostom, Hilary, and others. 
In a similar way, Wisdom is spoken of by Solomon in the Proverbs 
(viiL 11, 19) : “ For wisdom is better than rubies ; and all the things 
that may be desired are not to be compared to it . My 

fruit is better than gold, yea, than fine gold; and my revenue 
than choice silver.” 

Literally. By this treasure S. Jerome understands Christ Himself; 
and S. Augustine, Holy Scripture. (Quest, in Matt. q. 13). “For 
when anyone has attained partly to the understanding of it, he feels 
great mysteries lie hid in it, and he sells all he has, and buys it; 
that is, by despising things temporal, he procures rest for himself, 
that he may be rich in the knowledge of God.” 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



PEARLS. 


IS* 

Tropologically , S. Gregory, by the treasure, understands heavenly 
desire. He says: “The treasure being found is hid that it may 
be preserved, because it is not enough for a man to guard the zeal 
of his heavenly desire from the wicked spirits, who does not hide the 
same from the praise of men. In this present life we are, as it were, 
in a road, by which we are going to our country. Wicked spirits, 
like robbers, beset our path. He, therefore, who openly carries his 
treasure in the way desires to be robbed of it” 

Again the kingdom of Heaven , &c.— goodly; Syriac, the best ; 
Arabic, a good gem . He means the faithful ought with as great zeal 
to provide themselves with th^doctrine and life of the Gospel (which 
is the way and the price of the kingdom of Heaven) as a merchant 
seeks for pearls, and buys the one of them which is most precious : 
for otherwise the kingdom, or the Gospel itself is properly compared 
to a pearl rather than to a merchant man. 

And when he had found \ &c. For as this pearl was beyond all 
price, so is the Gospel See Pliny on the price of pearls (/. 9, 35), 
where he says, among other things, that pearls have greater affinity 
with the sky than with the sea. See what I have said on the Apoca- 
lypse xxl 21, where I have enumerated thirteen properties of pearls. 

Symbolically . The precious pearl is Christ, also the Blessed 
Virgin, also the religious state, also charity: “for charity is a 
precious pearl, without which nothing can profit thee, whatsoever 
thou mayst have,” says S. Augustine. For charity is the necklace of 
Christ Also a precious pearl is the contemplative life, concerning 
which Christ said of the Magdalene, “ Mary hath chosen the good 
part” A pearl is, also, the soul of every man. It is also eternal 
felicity, as our Salmeron appositely shows (tom. viL tract, n) ; for all 
these are principal parts of the kingdom of Heaven, *>., of the 
doctrine of the Gospel Such, likewise, is humility, even as our 
Thomas teaches, being taught of God himself (Imitat. Christi. /. 1, 
c. 2) : “If thou wishest profitably to know and to learn anything, 
love to be unknown, and to be counted as nothing. This is the 
loftiest and most useful knowledge — truly to know and despise thy 
self.” This is the most precious Gospel pearl, but its worth is 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


S. MATTHEW, XIII. 


* 5 2 

unknown to the proud children of Adam. Such also is the Cross of 
Christ, and to suffer for Christ See Hab. chap. iiL 4 : “There were 
horns in His hands ; there was His strength hid.” ( Vtdg.) 

The chief and most precious pearl of all, from which all virtues 
and all the Saints, like pearls are sprung, and from which they derive 
their beauty and their value, is Christ Himself For His Deity in 
His Humanity is as a pearl hid in a shelL It issued forth of the 
substance of the Virgin, and the dew of the Spirit, most white, 
through innocence of life. It was exceeding bright through wisdom ; 
round through the possession of all perfection ; having the weight of 
conscience, the smoothness of meekness, the price of blessedness. 

At 

For says Pliny, “ The value of pearls consists in whiteness, size, 
rotundity, smoothness and weight” Hear what S. Augustine says, 
“ In the beginning was the Word and the Word was with God : for the 
Word of the Lord shines with the brightness of truth, and is solid with 
the firmness of eternity, and is every where alike with the beauty of 
Divinity : when the shell of the flesh is pierced through, God may be 
perceived.” This pearl of Christ says our Salmeron, is small by 
humility, but precious in value ; Let us bear it on the head of our 
mind by way of ornament ; on our forehead by confessing the faith ; 
in our ears by obedience to die Law, obedience rendered to God in 
Himself, and our Superiors ; on our necks and breasts by love ; on 
our arms by the exercise of good works; in rings in our hands by the 
gift of discerning spirits ; in our girdles by chastity ; on our garments 
by modesty and holy devotion to eternal life ; but we ourselves also 
may become precious pearls, and by this means may induce others to 
imitate the most holy life of our Lord Jesus Christ 

Finally Christ is not only a very precious pearl, but He is also the 
gem of gems. He is a carbuncle, because He is the light of the 
world. He is an emerald because He delights the angels by the 
verdure of His grace. He is strong and invincible as a diamond. 
He produces joy as a sardius. He heals the leprosy of sin as a 
chrysoprasus. He assists the bringing forth of good works as a 
spiritual jasper ; He sharpens the intellect as a beryl ; He has 
celestial colour and life, as a sapphire ; He resists sleep and drunken* 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


THE DRAG-NET. 


# % 

\jVo 153 

ness, as an amethyst; and all the infirmitia^f the mind,’ as a . 
hyacinth ; He sustained the worry of the 

sardonyx in brightness and splendour ; He is a chrysolite in His 
golden charity. Whence the foundations of the heavenly Jerusalem 
are laid with these twelve precious stones, which signify the twelve 
Apostles of Christ. 


Again the kingdom of Heaven is like to a drag-net \ &c. The two 
preceding parables, those viz. of the Treasure and the Pearl denoted 
the value and dignity of the Gospel This parable shows its capa- 
ciousness, viz. that it embraces all nations and people of the world, 


bad as well as good. Christ «, pounded the parable with this object, 
that the Apostles and Saints should not wonder, if among the faithful 
they beheld some living wickedly, just as in a great kingdom no one is 
surprised that murderers, thieves and adulterers are found. Again it 
was spoken in order that no one should flatter himself, simply on 
account of being a believing Christian, since there are in the Church 
many who are wicked ; but that he should give diligence to be just 
and holy in the Church. 

A drag-net: Gr. aayfivy, signifying the kind of net commonly called 
a drag or trawling-net, because of its sweeping the water or the sea 
in order to catch the fishes. Properly this sagene or drag-net is the 


bosom of the net In like manner all the faithful are, as it were, 


received into the maternal bosom of the Church, and there are 


cherished, nourished and preserved. 

Of every kind : for thus the Gospel is preached to all nations, and 
of them the Church is formed. The fishes are believers, the fisher- 


men are the Apostles, and the drag-net is the Church and the Gospel. 

Which , when it was full, &c., cast the bad away . They cast them 
into the sea, or upon die shore. The Arabic is, They collected the 
select fish in their vessels . The vessels denote the various mansions 
in the house of our Father, as Christ says, (John, xiv.), or the various 
abodes of Heaven, which, in another place are called the eternal taber- 
nacles . The bad , Gr. oairpa, i.e., putrid, decaying, noisome. Prom this 
passage S. Augustine rightly proves against the Donatists that in the 
Church there are not only good people, or as Calvin says, the elect, 
but bad and reprobate people. 


Digitized by Google 



*54 


t MATTHEW, XIII. 


So shall it be in the end of the worlds & c. Arabic, in the end of this 
time, that is to say, in the day of judgment 
He saith unto them, therefore every Scribe , &C. It is as though He 
said, Forasmuch as ye, O ye Apostles, have understood by these My 
parables, how great a treasure the kingdom of Heaven is, ye ought 
to draw forth all things from this treasury, that ye may communicate 
them to others ; yea, to the whole world. Again : because ye have 
understood my method of teaching the things of Heaven, and things 
which are new to men, by means of parables borrowed from things in 
common use ; ye too ought to teach and preach the same things in 
the same manner, that from the old things, which they do understand, 
they may receive and learn those new things which ye preach. 

A Scribe ; Arabic, a Scribe, who teaches for the kingdom of Heaven, 
i.e., an Evangelical doctor well instructed to announce the Gospel, 
and lead believers to the kingdom of Heaven ; such as ye are, and 
shall be, O ye Apostles, who are fully taught by Me and the Holy 
Spirit He opposes His own Scribes, ie., Doctors and Preachers, 
His Apostles in fact, to the Scribes of the Jews, which last only 
preached the law of Moses, and the earthly advantages flowing from it 
Things new and old. This is a proverb, signifying every kind ot 
food, substance, or goods necessary or useful for sustaining a family. 
Some of these things are best when new, others when old Hence 
the proverb, 44 New honey, old wine ” ; ie., honey is best when fresh, 
but the oldest wine is the best Hence too the verse in Pindar's 
ninth Olympic Hymn, 44 Praise old wine, but the flowers of new 
Hymns." The meaning is — As the father of a family provides for 
his household things new and old, ie., everything necessary and 
useful, so ought a Gospel teacher to bring forth, at suitable times, 
according to the capacity of his hearers, various discourses, knowledge 
of every kind ; and especially to take care to teach them the new* 
and unknown mysteries ot the Gospel, by means of old examples, 
such as parables and similitudes, which his hearers can take in. 
Moreover, some of the ancients, as SS. Chrysostom, Augustine, 
Jerome, Hilary, and Bede apply old and new to the Old and New 
Testaments. For that is the best preaching when the New Testa- 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



CHRIST MADE YOKES AND PLOUGHS. 


*55 


ment is confirmed and illustrated from the Old, and proved to be in 
all points typically agreeable to it For the Old Testament was the 
type of the New; the New Testament is the antitype of the Old. 

AbuL objects that when Christ said this, the New Testament was 
not written. I reply that it was already spoken and taught by Christ, 
and was shortly about to be written by the four Evangelists ; and 
that Christ knew this. Wherefore He bids the Apostles that they 
should preach themselves what they had heard, but that their suc- 
cessors should preach the same things as written by the Evangelists. 

Jesus passed on from thence, i.e., from His house which He had at 
Capernaum. 

And came unto his own country , &c. This country was not Beth- 
lehem where He was bom, but Nazareth, where he was brought up. 

Is not this the son of the carpenter \ &c. The Gr. is, the son of the 
workman, the Arab, adds, in wood. S. Mark (vi. 3.) Is not this the 
workman t “ Nor is it to be wondered at,” says S. Augustine, “since 
both might be said, for they believed Him to be a workman, in that 
he was the son of a workman.” This was because they were accus- 
tomed to see Him working with Joseph. It seems therefore that 
Christ wrought with His father Joseph until He was thirty years of 
age, when He began to teach and to preach. SS. Hilary and Ambrose 
think that Christ was a blacksmith ; Hugo, a mason, or a goldsmith. 
The general opinion is that Christ was a carpenter, as S. Thomas, 
teaches out of S. Chrysostom. S. Justin (Dial. c. Dyph .) says, 44 He 
was accustomed to make ploughs and yokes for oxen.” Hence Christ 
in His preaching often takes His similitudes from those objects, as, 
44 Take my yoke upon you,” and, 44 44 No man putting his hand to the 
plough and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God.” Hence 
too when a Christian was asked in derision by Julian the Apostate, 
“what the Son of the Carpenter was doing;” answered wittily, 44 He is 
making a bier for Julian.” This was shortly before Julian was slain, 
(See Sozomen. /. 6. c. 2.) Some however say that Christ did not 
exercise a workman’s craft But I have said more on this subject on 
S. Luke ii. 51. 

Mystically : “ God is the workman who is the Father of Christ 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



i5« 


8. MATTHEW, XIII. 


who framed the works of the whole world, who built the ark of 
Noah, who set in order the Tabernacle of Moses, who instituted 
the ark of the Covenant You might call Him a carpenter, who 
planes down a rigid mind, and cuts away proud thoughts.” (Serm. 
de Nat.) Moreover, says S. Chrysologus [Serm. 48.) " Christ was 
the son of a workman ; but of Him, who made the frame of the 
universe, not by a hammer, but by His command ; who disposed the 
composition of the elements, not by skill but by His command ; who 
kindled the sun not by earthly fire, but by His supreme heat; who 
made all things out of nothing, and made them, O man, for thee, 
that thou mightest reflect upon the artificer by considering His 
work.” 

And His brethren , , /antes, &c. Brethren , i.e., cousins, as I have 
said Chap. xiL 45. 

James: This is James the less, called the son of Alphaeus, an 
Apostle, and first Bishop of Jerusalem. I have spoken more at length 
concerning him in the preface to his Canonical Epistle. 

And Joseph : The Greek and Syriac have Joses. He was one of the 
seventy disciples. See what I have said about him on Acts L 23. 

And Simon : Many think from Abdia, Sophronius, Isidore, and 
Bede, that this was Simon the Canaanite, the Apostle. As though 
this last had been the brother of James the less and Jude, But 
6imon the Apostle came from Cana of Galilee ; but these brethren that 
is cousins of Christ, were sprung from Nazareth, together with Christ 
Himself. Wherefore the inhabitants of Nazareth wondered from 
whence there was in Jesus, their fellow citizen, such great wisdom, 
since they knew his brethren and relations to be simple and unlearned 
persons, as is plain from Mark vL 1., &c. It seems therefore more 
probable that this Simon is the S. Simeon who succeeded S. James 
as Bishop of Jerusalem. For Simeon was the son of Cieophas 
and his wife Mary, as Hegesippus testifies (Bus. H. B. 3. 1 1.), whom 
SS. Chiysostom and Theophylact teach to have been the brother of S. 
James the less. Although Hegesippus and Epiphanius (Hares. 66.) are 
opinion that he was not the brother, but the cousin of James. He was 
that Simeon, who was crucified in the tenth year of Trajan, when he 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


THE LORD’S SISTERS. 


*57 


was t 20 yeais old, a.d. 109 ; and astonished everyone by his constancy 
and fortitude. From this it follows that those writers who thought 
him to be the same person as Simon the Canaanite are mistaken. 

And Jude . He was a brother of James the less. I have spoken 
of him in the preface to his Epistle. 

You will ask whether these four were brethren, strictly so called, 
bom of the same father and mother? In the first place, it is plain 
that James and Joses were brothers. This appears from Matt xxvii. 
56. As to the other two, Simon and Jude, some think they were 
brothers of James and Joses, but on the mother’s side only. They 
say that their mother was the Mary who was first married to Alphaeus, 
to whom she bore James and Joses, and that therefore James is 
called of Alphaeus , that is, his son; and after Alphaeus was dead, she 
married Cleophas, to whom she bore Simon and Jude. Thus S. 
Thomas (a. 1, ad. Galat. Led. 5). 

2. Baronius (apparat. Annul, c. 46) considers there were three 
sisters — i.e., cousins of the Blessed Virgin — of the name of Mary. 
The first, Mary, the wife of Alphaeus, and the mother of James and 
Jude (the Apostles), and Joses. 2. Mary, the wife of Cleophas, the 
mother of that S. Simeon who succeeded S. James in the Bishopric 
of Jerusalem. The third was Mary Salome, the wife of Zebedee and 
the mother of the Apostles James and John. 

But it is clear that Mary, the wife of Alphaeus is the same as 
Mary the wife of Cleophas, if we compare S. John xix. 25 with Matt, 
xxvii. 56, and Mark xv. 40. For John says : “Now there stood by 
the cross of Jesus his mother, and his mother’s sister, Mary the wife 
of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene.” But Matthew says : “ Among 
which was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James and 
Joses, and the mother of Zebedee’s children.” And Mark : “There 
were also women looking on afar off; among whom was Mary Mag- 
dalene, and Mary the mother of James the less and of Joses, and 
Salome.” 

We see here plainly, that she who is called by John Mary of Cleo- 
phas is called by Matthew and Mark, Mary the mother of James and 
Joses; James, I say, who is called (Acts L and Matt x.) not the son 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


t5» 


S. MATTHEW, XIII. 


of Zebedee, but of Alphaeus. Therefore, Mary of Cleophas and 
Mary of Alphaus are one and the same person. Cleophas and 
Alphaeus are really one and the same Hebrew word, by a common 
interchange of letters. Unless you prefer to consider that one of 
them was the husband, the other the father, of this Mary. 

Again, you may see, that she who is called Salome by Mark, is 
called by Matthew the mother of Zebedee’s children ; this, therefore, 
was Salome. It seems, then, that the same Mary of Cleophas, or 
Alphaeus, was the mother of these four — viz., James, Joseph, Simon, 
and Jude. For Matthew and Mark (in the places already cited) call 
her the mother of James and Joses. But Jude was the brother of 
James, as he says himself in the beginning of his Epistle. Simon 
also, or Simeon, who succeeded his brother James at Jerusalem, was 
also a brother, for he was the son of Cleophas and Mary his wife. 
Moreover, Hegesippus, S. Chrysostom, and several other Fathers assert 
that this Mary was not the daughter, but the wife of Cleophas. And 
the same Hegesippus says this Cleophas was the brother of Joseph, the 
spouse of the Blessed Virgin. He is the same Cleophas to whom, 
with his companion, Christ made himself known on the way to Em- 
maus in the breaking of bread. He was slain by the Jews, in that 
very house of Emmaus, on account of His confession of Christ. He 
died a martyr, on the 25th of Sept., as the Roman Martyrology 
has it 

You will ask, why then do Matthew and Mark call this Mary the 
mother of James and Joses, but not of Simon and Jude? I reply, for 
the sake of brevity, and because the two first, viz., James and Joses 
were accounted at that time more celebrated than the other two. 
This Mary, the mother of so many saintly sons and daughters, died 
in sanctity, in Judea, on the 9th April. 

And his sisters , &c. The sisters of James, Joses, &c., are called 
by Hippolytus (Ap. Niccph . /. 2. c. 3.), Esther, and Tama ; but by S. 
Epiphanius (Bares 78.) and Theophylact they are called Mary, Salome 
who was the wife of Zebedee, and the mother of S. John and S 
James the great, the Apostles, who were therefore nephews, througl 
their sister, of James the less, Joses, &c. (See Christophor. a Castro 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



THE LORD'S BRETHREN. 


*59 


de Ddpai. r. i \ where he shows that Salome was older than her 
brothers James and Jude For she was the mother of John and 
James whc were chosen by Christ, together with their undes, James 
and Jude, to be Apostles, For John seems to have been only three 
years younger than Christ Hence too, only James, Joses, Simon 
and Jude, the sons of Cleophas, are called brothers, *>., cousins of 
Christ, on the father’s side. But John and James the sons of Zebedee, 
are not called brethren of Christ, because they were not first cousins 
of Christ, but children of His cousin Salome. Again Christophor. 
gathers from hence, that James the less, who was the brother of 
Salome, was senior to James the greater, the son of Salome and 
Zebedee, by nine or ten years at the least James the less was the 
unde of James the great For they were not so called, in respect of 
age but of their vocation, by Christ It is not doubtful that Christ 
had many other relations and connections, but these are specially 
mentioned, both because they were nearer in blood ; and because 
they at length believed on Him, and became His Apostles. 

They were offended, \ &c. This is, they were indignant that Christ 
who was but a workman, should set himself up for a Prophet and 
teacher ; just as men would be offended and indignant now, if they 
saw any one jump out of a workshop into a Cathedral, and act the 
Doctor; and would accuse nimof the utmost arrogance and folly. 
But the inhabitants of Nazareth were ignorant that Christ was the 
Son of God, who, out of His immense love, had not disdained to be 
born among workmen, and to act as one, that He might redeem us, 
and teach us humility by His example. Therefore this charity 
and humility of Christ, which ought to have made them admire 
and venerate Him, was a stumbling-block to them, because they 
would not believe that God would be willing to stoop so low. 

But Jesus said unto them , &c. This is a common proverb, and 
generally, but not universally true ; for John the Baptist, as well as 
Isaiah, Elias, Elisha, Daniel, Hosea, &c., were held in great honour 
by the Jews their countrymen. 

Now the first cause why a prophet, that is a teacher, is frequently 
without honour among his own people, is what S. Jerome gives, ** It 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



i6o 


8. MATTHEW, XIIL 


is almost natural for citizens to have an invidious feeling towards their 
fellow citizens. For they do not consider a man’s present works, but 
call to mind his frail infancy, as though they themselves had not 
arrived by the same gradations of age at mature years.” Listen to 
S. Ambrose, (c. 4. Luc). “ No slight envy is that which betrays 
itself, which forgetful of the charity belonging to citizenship, turns 
the causes of love into bitter hatred. This is declared both by 
example and the oracle, that, in vain, do you look for the assistance of 
heavenly mercy, if you envy the progress of another’s virtue. For 
the Lord despises the envious, and turns away the miracles of His 
power from those who disparage the divine blessings in others.” 

2. Because too great familiarity breeds contempt as S. Chrysostom 
says. And Theophylact says, “ We are wont to despise those things 
which are very common, always paying greater regard to foreign and 
unaccustomed things. We admire what comes from abroad; we 
despise what we have at home— even when what we have at home is 
better. Thus, we turn up our nose at our own physicians, however 
learned they may be ; and we purchase herbs and flowers brought 
from India, when we have the very same, or better, in our own 

woods. Of a truth ‘novelty is charming.’” 

3. Because by daily conversation with people, their faults, or 
natural infirmities, are readily disclosed ; and this is apt to lessen 
our veneration for them. But it is otherwise in conversing with 
God, because the greater converse we have with Him, the more 
does it conduce to reverence. The inhabitants of Nazareth seeing 
Christ eat, drink, sleep, work like other men, despised Him, 
especially when they beheld His relations mean and poor : Nor, 
indeed, could they believe that He was bom of a Virgin Mother, 
and had God for His Father. Let, therefore, a teacher and preachei 
avoid familiarity with men, lest he be despised ; for, as S. Cyril says, 
“ Preaching is not able to bring forth fruit where the preacher is 
despised.” 

And He did not many mighty worts there , &c. (Arab.), on account 
of the paucity of their faith This caused them to be unworthy of 
miracles. S. Jerome gives another reason, “That He might not 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


WHY CHRIST WORKS FEW MIRACLES. 


101 


condemn their unbelief by working many miracles.” For he who 
beholds many miracles, and does not believe, sins more gravely 
than he who has beheld but few, and will be, therefore, more 
heavily condemned, and punished in helL This was the cause why 
Christ wrought but few miracles among the Jews, says S. Jerome, 
u He works greater miracles among the Gentiles, day by day, by 
His apostles, not so much in healing men’s bodies as in saving their 
souls.” 


vou u. 


H 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



t6i 


CHAPTER XIV. 

I Herocts opinion of Christ. 15 The Miracle of ike five Loaves , 22 and <f 
Walking on the Sea. 

A T that time Herod the tetrorch heard of the fame of Jesus ; 

2 And said unto his servants. This is John the Baptist : he is risen from 
the dead ; and therefore mighty works do shew forth themselves in him. 

3 For Herod had laid hold on John, and bound him, and put him in prison for 
Heredias* sake, his brother Philip’s wife. 

4 For John said unto to him, It is not lawful for thee to have her. 

5 And when he would have put him to death, he feared the multitude, because 
they counted him as a prophet 

6 But when Herod’s birthday was kept, the daughter of Heredias danced before 
them, and pleased Herod. 

7 Whereupon he promised with an oath to give her whatsoever she would 
ask. 

8 And she, being before instructed of her mother, said, Give me here John 
Baptist’s head in a charger. 

9 And the king was sorry s nevertheless for the oath’s sake, and them which 
sat with him at meat, he commanded it to be given her. 

10 And he sent, and beheaded John in the prison. 

II And his head was brought in a charger, and given to the damsel : and she 
brought it to her mother. 

12 And his disciples came, and took up the body, and buried it, and went and 
told Jesus. 

13 f When Jesus heard of it, he departed thence by ship in a desert place 
apart : and when the people had heard thereof they followed him on foot out of 
the cities. 

14 And Jesus went forth, and saw a great multitude, and was moved with com- 
passion towards them, and he healed their sick. 

15 U And when it was evening, his disciples came to him, saying, This is a 
desert place, and the time is now past ; send the multitude away, that they may go 
into the villages, and buy themselves victuals. 

16 But Jesus said unto them. They need not depart ; give ye them to eat 
17 And they say unto him, We have here but five loaves, and two fishes. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


163 


18 He said, Bring them hither to me. 

19 And he commanded the multitude to sit down on the grass, and took the 
five loaves, and the two fishes, and looking up to heaven, he blessed, and brake, 
and gave the loaves to his disciples, and the disciples to the multitude. 

ao And they did all eat, and were filled : and they took up of the fragments 
that remained twelve baskets full. 

21 And they that had eaten were about five thousand men, besides women and 
children. 

22 U And straightway Jesus constrained his disciples to get into a ship, and to 
go before him unto the other side, while he sent the multitudes away. 

23 And when he had sent the multitudes away, he went up into a mountain 
apart to pray : and when the evening was come, he was there alone. 

24 But the ship was now in the midst of the sea, tossed with waves : for the 
wind was contrary. 

25 And in the fourth watch of the night, Jesus went unto them, walking on the 
sea. 

26 And when the disciples saw him walking on the sea, they were troubled, 
saying, It is a spirit ; and they cried out for fear. 

27 But straightway Jesus spake unto them, saying, Be of good cheer ; It is I ; be 
not afraid. 

28 And Peter answered him and said. Lord, if it be thou, bid me come unto 
thee on the water. 

29 And he said, Come. And when Peter was come down out of the ship, he 
walked on the water, to go to Jesus. 

30 But when he saw the wind boisterous, he was afraid ; and beginning to sink, 
he cried, saying, Lord, save me. 

31 And immediately Jesus stretched forth his hand, and caught him, and said 
unto him, O thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt? 

32 And when they were come into the ship, the wind ceased. 

33 Then they that were in the ship came and worshipped him, saying, Of a 
truth thou art the Son of God. 

34 7 And when they were gone over, they came into the land of Genne- 
saret 

35 And when the men of that place had knowledge of him, they sent out into 
all that country round about, and brought unto him all that were diseased ; 

36 And besought him that they might only touch the hem of his garment ) and 
as many as touched were made perfectly whole. 

The first eleven verses of this chapter relate to the decollation of 
John the Baptist, of which I have spoken at length on the sixth 
chapter of S. Mark. 

His Body; Syriac, sclado, Le., a trunk without a head; because, as 
Nicephorus says (/. 1, c. 19), “ Herodias was afraid of John’s reproof 
even after his head was cut 0$ and feared its being united to the 
rest of his body ; therefore she took it away with her, and buried it 
without witnesses in a remote part of the kingdom. Bede and 

H 2 


I 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


x64 


S. MATTHEW, XIV. 


Ruffinus assert the same thing. Observe in this the terrors of a 
guilty conscience. Herodias was afraid that if the head of John 
were re-united to his body, he would rise again, and again denounce 
her incestuous marriage with Herod. Thus, Herod thought John 
had risen again in Christ Thus, the Baptist’s head, even when it 
was cut off, was a source of terror to Herodias. 

Came and told Jesus: for John, before his death, had commanded 
his disciples that, when he was dead, they should transfer themselves 
to Jesus, as indeed some of them had done whilst he was yet 
alive. 

When Jesus heard, \ &c. Herod, in the meanwhile, had been 
occupied with a war against Aretas, king of Arabia, and had not 
attended to the words and deeds of Jesus. But now that the fame 
of His many miracles was constantly increasing, he began to turn 
his attention to them, as Matthew relates in the beginning of this 
chapter; and was led to suspect that Jesus was John who had risen 
from the dead. This was why Jesus retired into the desert ; i, and 
primarily, that He may avoid Herod’s fury, who (as he had beheaded 
John) would seek to behead him again, in the person of Jesus, 
especially since it might easily occur to him, or be suggested to him 
by the Pharisees, that this was the Messiah, the King promised to 
the Jews, and expected for so many ages. Wherefore, fearing to be 
deprived of his kingdom, he would have cut Him off, as his father 
sought to destroy Christ when he cut off the infants at Bethlehem. 
2. He retired in order that He might refresh, by a season of quiet, 
His Apostles, who were now returning from their preaching, and 
were wearied with their many labours. 

In a ship: that by it He might go across the Sea of Galilee, or 
Tiberias, as appears from John vi. i. For this is the same history 
which S. John relates at greater length in his sixth chapter. Hence, 
it is plain that this took place about the Passover. 

A desert place — Luke adds (ix. io), which belonged to Bethsaida . 
Adrichomius (in his description of the Holy Land), Jansen, and 
others think that this desert in which Christ fed the five thousand 
was called Bethsaida, not because it was dose to that city, but on the 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


SITUATION Of THE DESERT OF fcETHSAlDA. 1 65 

Opposite shore, across the sea of Galilee, between Julias and Dalma- 
nutha. They attempt to prove this, because S. John says Christ 
went away across the sea of Galilee, and Matthew (xiv. 34) that He 
passed over the sea. 

But I say this desert was near Bethsaida, on the same shore, and so 
between Bethsaida and Tiberias. This is proved, 1, because iAike says 
expressly (ix. 10), He departed by Himself into a desert place , which 
is Bethsaida. The Arabic has, into a desert place near the city , which 
is called Bethsaida. 

2. Burchard testifies the same thing — viz., that this place was 
near Tiberias, and is called Mensa (a table). 

3. Because Nicephorus (/. 8, c. 3) writes that S. Helena built a 
church of twelve thrones in the place in which Christ fed the five 
thousand. 

4. Because after Christ had made this multiplication of the loaves, 
when He fled from the multitude (who wished to make Him a king), 
He commanded His disciples to sail to Bethsaida, as though it had 
been nigh at hand. Again, John says (vi. 23) : “ There came other 
ships from Tiberias nigh unto the place where they had eaten bread, 
after that the Lord had given thanks.” This place, therefore, was 
near Tiberias, *>., between it and Bethsaida. And when they did 
not find Him there, they went across the sea, where they found Him, 
as S. John subjoins. 

To the argument that Christ is said to have crossed over the sea, 
I reply : He did not sail over to the opposite shore, but went from 
one part of the same shore to another place by sea, from one bay 
of the lake to another, or from one side of a bay to the other side, 
by a straight course across, instead of going round by the land and 
following the windings of the shore. So Francis Lucas, Maldonatus, 
and others. The mountain to which Jesus retired, and from which 
He came down to the crowds who followed Him (John vi. 3) seems 
to have formed this bay. Lastly, across means the same thing as 
beyond. 

And when the multitudes heard \ &c. Vou will ask, How could 
people on foot follow Christ going across the sea in a ship? I 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


1 66 


S. MATTHEW, XIV. 


answer, that when Christ went into the ship, the multitudes spread 
abroad His fame through the neighbourhood in all directions. 
Many, therefore, were stirred up to follow Christ going in a straight 
course in a ship, by passing round the sea of Galilee, until they came 
to Bethsaida, and from thence to Capernaum, where they found 
Christ, as S. John relates (vi. 24, 25). 

And going forth, from His retirement in the desert of Bethsaida, 
He saw , &c. They were as sheep not having a shepherd, says Mark 
(vi. 34). Learn hence from Christ, to prefer the care and conveni- 
ence of others to your own ease and prayers. 

When evening was come , &c. — the time of dinner, ie n of taking 
food. 

But yesus said \ &c. Christ is preparing the way for the miracle 
of the multiplication of the bread. Therefore He detained the 
multitude until the evening, that His disciples might ask Him to 
dismiss them; whereupon He bids them to give them food, that 
thereby the miracle might be better attested and the benefit be more 
grateful, inasmuch as they saw themselves devoid of all means of 
supplying such vast numbers of people with bread in the desert S. 
John adds : M He saith unto Philip, Whence shall we buy bread, that 
these may eat? And this He said to prove him : for He Himself 
knew what He would da Philip answered Him, Two hundred 
pennyworth of bread is not sufficient for them, that every one of 
them may take a little.” 

Christ asked Philip rather than the others because he was more 
candid and docile than the rest, but not so quick-witted, and was 
accustomed to ask many things that were sufficiently plain — as (in 
John xiv. 8) he asked Christ, saying, " Lord, show us the Father, 
and it sufficeth us.” Thus S. Chrysostom, Theophylact, and S. 
Cyril 

Two hundred pence would amount to about which would 
nearly suffice to purchase bread for 2000 persons. But here there 
were 5000 men, besides women and children. Many were also 
hungry from long fasting. Truly, therefore said Philip that two 
hundred pennyworth would not suffice for feeding so great a mul- 
titude. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



CHRIST BOTH GAVE THANfcS ANt> BLfcSSfcO. 1 67 

They answered Him , &c. These fishes were already cooked, so 
that they might be immediately distributed by the Apostles, when 
Christ bade them. S. John explains this verse (vi. 8, 9) : “ One of His 
disciples, Andrew, Simon, Peter’s brother, said unto Him, There is 
a lad here, which five barley-loaves and two small fishes : but what are 
they among so many ? ” 

He said ’ &c. That He might multiply them by His benediction. 
The Apostles obeyed and brought them. And this their prompt 
obedience and faith, together with their charity and desire to relieve 
the hunger of so many thousand people elicited this miracle from 
Christ 

And when He had commanded , &c. S. Mark relates the first part 
of this verse more at length : and commanded them, to make them all 
sit down by companies upon the green grass . These companies were 
the several gatherings of people collected together to dine. Whence 
Luke (ix.14) calls them /easts ( convivia , Vulg.) i.e., companies of guests , 
in which for the sake of propriety, the men lay down with the men, 
and the women by themselves with their children, as Matthew 
here intimates. For formerly people did not sit at tables upon 
benches, but reclined upon couches, which were drawn close to the 
tables. Here the grass supplied the place of couches. Christ com- 
manded them to lie down in companies, that no one should be passed 
over without receiving his portion of bread and fish. 

Looking up, & c. S. John has,/esus took the loaves, and when He 
had given thanks , He distributed to those who were set down. Where- 
fore the heretics explain the word blessed, by He gave thanks : but 
wrongly. For Christ, according to His manner, gave thanks to the 
Father first, then blessed the loaves. For Mark says, looking up to 
Heaven he blessed and brake the loaves . And Luke, He looked ip to 
Heaven, and blessed them, viz., the loaves, and brake and distributed 
them. Christ therefore here blessed both God by praising Him and 
giving Him thanks, and also the loaves themselves. This He did in 
order that He might draw down Divine grace upon them, by means 
of which they might be multiplied, and acquire strength and efficacy 
to nourish, strengthen, and exhilarate so great a multitude, just as 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


i68 


8. MATTHEW, XIV. 


much as though they had been fed upon a rich feast of flesh and 
wine. Christ by this benediction endued these loaves with some, not 
physical, but moral virtue ; that is to say, He ordained and appointed 
them for miraculous multiplication, whereby He placed His hand, as 
it were, i.e. 9 His own Divine virtue upon the loaves, that they should 
straightway be really multiplied. And this indeed He did by con- 
verting the neighbouring atmosphere, or some other material gradually, 
but without being perceived, into bread. For God creates nothing 
de novo out of nothing, but produces and transforms all things from 
the matter which was created at the beginning of the world. In a 
similar manner He multiplied the meal and the oil of the widow of 
Sarepta, for the sake of Elias. That these loaves were most excellent 
and endued with vast nutritive virtue is plain from this, that they 
were Divine loaves, produced by Christ by a miracle. For all God's 
works are perfect So God, when at the beginning of the world He 
blessed all the various species of created things, by this blessing en- 
dued them with these very powers of generating, propagating, and 
multiplying themselves : for He said, increase and multiply. Thus 
Christ instituting the Eucharist at the last Supper, blessed the bread 
and transformed it into His own body. And this multiplication of 
the loaves by means of Christ's benediction was a kind of type of the 
transmutation in the Eucharist ; for shortly afterwards He uttered His 
long discourse upon the Eucharist which S. John gives in his sixth 
chapter, when he compares the Eucharist to manna. “ Not as your 
fathers did eat manna, and are dead, whoso eateth this bread shall live 
for ever.” S. Augustine gives the reason {Tract. 24. in John .) “ From 
whence God multiplies the crops of com from a few grains, from 
thence He multiplied the loaves in His own hands. For the power 
was in the hands of Christ For those five loaves were, as it were 
seed, not indeed committed to the earth, but multiplied by Him 
Who made the earth." Whence S. Chrysostom says, “ Those five 
loaves were multiplied in the hands of the disciples, and diffused 
abroad after the manner of a fountain." As S. Hilary says, “Frag- 
ments succeed fragments, and that which was broken off continually 
escapes from Him who breaks it.” As S. Jerome says, “ Whilst they 
break there was a sowing of food." 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


THE JESUS-PURSE. 


169 

Tropologically : Christ here teaches by this action, that bread 
and riches, corporeal as well as spiritual, are not diminished by being 
given in alms, but are multiplied a hundred and a thousandfold. 
Thus S. John, Patriarch of Alexandria, called on account of his 
liberality, the Almoner, was wont to say that he learnt by daily 
experience, that the more he gave to the poor, the more he received 
from God. He used to say, “ I shall see, O Lord who will leave oft 
first, Thou in giving to me, or I in distributing to the poor.” So 
Leontius in his Life, Pope Adrian II. succeeded Nicolas I. a.d. 
914. — this Adrian, says Platina was a friend of Pope Sergius, from 
whom he once received forty denarii as a gift He went home and 
gave them to his steward, to distribute them amongst the pilgrims and 
beggars who were standing in the vestibule of his house. When he 
attempted to fulfill his master’s behest he found that it would be 
impossible with so small a sum to satisfy so vast a number as required 
assistance. He returned to Adrian, and explained how the matter 
stood. Then Adrian took the money, and came to the poor himself, 
and gave three denarii to everyone of them, reserving as many 
for his own household expenses. The steward marvelled at the 
miracle. Adrian said to him, do you see how kind and liberal 
the Lord is, especially to those who are liberal and bountiful to the 
poor? 

S. Lydwin of Holland, a singular mirror of patience and charity, 
although she was poor herself was wont diligendy to succour the 
poor. She had a few small coins in a purse : these she was always 
giving away, when others were supplied from heaven in their place, so 
that they never failed, but ever increased, and thus her purse came to 
be called the yesus purse, Read her Life in Surius. See 2. Cor. ix. 
6. seq., “ He that soweth sparingly, shall reap also sparingly : and he 
that soweth in blessings, ( Vulg) i,e. many benefits, shall reap in bless- 
ings, i.e, many benefits.” Wherefore when you give a loaf, or a coin 
to a poor man, you do not lose it, but you sow it; for as from one 
grain of seed many grains grow, so it is likewise with loaves and 
money. 

They all ate. There was a vast multitude of women and little ones 


t 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


A 


I JO S. MATTHEW, XIV. 

besides the five thousand men. For the women were more devoted 
and more curious to behold Christ the new Prophet, than the men 
were. 

And were filled. You will say, there is no mention here of wine. 
How then were they filled, if they drank nothing ; for a dinner with- 
out anything to drink is a dog-banquet I answer, Christ did not 
give them wine, because there were streams of water at hand, of which 
they might drink. 

For to drink water is natural and wholesome, and sufficient for 
nature. Christ did not wish to excite their throats with wine. God 
gives food for necessity, not for luxury and gluttony. Thus, an 
angel brought to Elias in the desert bread and a cruse of water, but 
no wine. So a raven, by God’s command, brought daily half a loaf 
to S. Paul, the first hermit ; but he used to quench his thirst at a 
neighbouring fountain. God did the same to other saints. Indeed, 
from Adam until the Deluge — a space of sixteen hundred years, to 
the time of Noah, who first planted a vineyard — religious men 
neither ate flesh, nor drank wine; but their food was fruit, and their 
beverage water. Yet they lived to be nine hundred years old. 
Abstinence, therefore, is the mother of health, as well as of wisdom 
and holiness. 

And took up, &c. They brought back, therefore, more bread than 
they had brought to Christ at first For the twelve baskets would 
contain not five, but thirty or more loaves. It is probable Christ 
first broke the five loaves with His own hands, and in breaking 
multiplied them, and placed them in these baskets for distribution. 
These were afterwards, by His command, distributed by the Apostles 
to the different companies, and were gradually more and more multi- 
plied ; by which means they brought back to Christ as many baskets 
of fragments as they had received baskets of loaves from Him at 
the beginning. Cedrenus ( Compend \ ffistor.) relates that these twelve 
baskets were carefully preserved in the Church of the Twelve Apostles, 
which Constantine the Great built at Constantinople. 

In the Greek, these baskets are called cophini, They were much 
used by the Jews. This appears from a line in Juvenal : 

“ The Jews have cophini and hay for furniture.” 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



LONG TOILING OF THE DISCIPLES. 


17 * 


And straightway Jesus constrained \ &c. Christ did this — first, 
because He wished to go apart, that He might pray more quietly 
and instantly, alone; as is plain from the following verse. 2. That 
He might in this way more easily escape from the crowd, who He 
knew would wish to make Him a king because He had multiplied 
the loaves, as S. John teaches (vi. 15). 3. That He might give 
an occasion for the miracle which followed — His assuaging the 
tempest in the sea. 

And sending away the multitude — *>., with His blessing, and 
prayers for their welfare. Christ prays alone, to show believers that 
they should avoid a crowd and noise in prayer, and pray to God in 
secret and silence, with collected minds. 

But the ship was tossed, \ &c. ; Gr. Patravitffuvov, Le., was vexed \ 
tormented. The Syriac is, when it was now distant many stadia from 
the land, it was greatly agitated. 

At the fourth watch, &c. ; Gr. ftt/Acucy, Le., guard. The Romans 
changed guard every three hours of the night These were then- 
watches both in cities and armies. They changed thus frequently, 
lest a longer watch should give occasion to sleep, as well as (o pre- 
vent guile and treachery. If the night were short, they divided it 
into three watches ; if long, into four. The fourth watch, therefore, 
commenced about the tenth hour of the night, and lasted until the 
end of the twelfth. The time here spoken of— being immediately 
after the multiplication of the loaves — was about the Feast of the 
Passover, as we have already seen. Hence, you may gather that 
this tempest took place about the vernal equinox, when the day is 
equal to the night, each lasting about twelve hours. This tempest, 
then, lasted for nine horns ; that is to say, during the three first vigils 
(or watches) of the night, until the fourth watch, when Christ came 
to His storm-tossed disciples. "That the Lord came to them in the 
fourth watch, shews they had been in peril all through the night,” 
says S. Chrysostom. And they, having rowed for nine hours, had 
not made more way than about twenty-five or thirty stadia (as S. 
John says), or about three Italian miles. Thus, during nine hours 9 
rowing, the Apostles had scarcely got half-way across the Sea of 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



S. MATTHEW, XIV. 


' 7 * 

Galilee ; for its breadth is about six miles, and its length sixteen. 
(See Josephus, Bell. yud. 3, 18.) He says it is forty stadia in 
breadth, and one hundred in length. Adrichomius, Jansen, and others 
think that the Apostles rowed across the entire breadth of the sea. 
But others think they sailed in an oblique direction, traversing a 
portion of its length. For the desert was situated between Beth- 
saida and Tiberias, as I have shown on the thirteenth verse of this 
chapter. 

Christ permitted His disciples to be tossed for so many hours by a 
tempest 1. that He might accustom them to endure hardness. 2. 
that they might more ardently pray for God’s help. 3. that the calm- 
ing of so fearful a tempest which Christ was about to afford might be 
more pleasant to them. 

Hear Lactantius, (lib. 4. dcvcra Sapient, c. 15.) “But when the 
disciples of Christ were now about the middle of the sea ; then He 
entered the sea on foot, and followed after them, as though he were 
walking upon solid ground : not as the poets fable Orion walking in 
the sea, who bore the waters on His shoulders, a portion of His body 
being immersed.” Afterwards he quotes the Sibylline verses, in which 
it was foretold that Christ would calm the winds and raging sea, 
would cure diseases, and would raise the dead Hear also S. Augus- 
tine (Serm. 14. de verb. Dom. secundum Matth.) u The fourth watch 
of the night is the last part of the night, when the night is well nigh 
finished Thus Christ will come at the end of the world, when the 
night of iniquity is over, to judge the quick and the dead” 

Walking upon the sea, by the divine virtue, which He had as God, 
and by the gift of agility, which as man, he assumed in time, says 
Joannes Major, on this passage. 

And when they saw him- saying , It is a spirit. Syriac, a lying 
vision , i.e., a spectre: both because such things are wont to walk by 
night and in the dark, and to appear to and terrify men, as Delrio 
shows by many instances (in Magico), as well as because, on account 
of the darkness, they did not recognise that it was Jesus who was 
walking in this manner, especially as Mark adds, He would have 
passed by them, as though he did not care for them, and had nothing 
to do with them, whence it follows : 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



WAS PETER RASH? 


173 


And they cried out : This confused clamour was elicited by fe^r, 
such as is wont to be with sailors when they fall into peril of ship- 
wreck, and despair of life, The disciples had a twofold cause of fear. 
To the fear of being buried by the waves was added the fear of the 
spirit, lest he should sink the ship. 

And straightway — be oj good cheer . Gr. Oaptriire, i.e., resume your 
failing courage, be brave and confident Arabic, be strong. I am, 
your Master, whom ye know, whose beneficence and omnipotence ye 
have experienced in so many miracles which I have wrought Surely 
I would not make sport of you, like a phantom ; but I intend to 
deliver you from the tempest, and from your fear. By this voice ot 
Christ sounding outwardly in their ears, and inwardly in their minds, 
Christ took away their fear, and filled them with serenity, security, 
and joy. 

Learn from this passage the difference between a good and an evil 
spirit, that the good spirit may terrify at first, but by and bye gives 
consolation and joy, as Christ did in this instance ; but a bad spirit 
gives sensual joy in the beginning, but presently causes sorrow, 
anguish and despair. 

Peter answered Him, &c. Calvin accuses Peter of rashness and 
folly. For Peter was in doubt, he says, whether the appearance were 
Christ, or the spectre of a demon. For the demon might have pre- 
tended that he was Christ, and have bid Peter come to him, and so 
have drowned him in the sea, as Delrio relates many spectres have 
done. The Fathers give a twofold answer : 1. Peter knew by His 
voice, gesture, dress, and much more by an interior recognition, that 
this was not a demon, but very Christ ; when therefore Peter says, if 
it be Thou, it is not the voice of doubt, but of one exulting with joy, 
and desiring to come quickly to Christ, that he might be near to Him 
whom he loved above all things. So S. Hilary and S. Chrysostom, 
i( do you perceive with what ardour Peter was burning ? Do you see 
how great his faith was even then ? No one loved Jesus so much as 
he did. Not only did he manifest love, but faith also. He believed 
not only that Christ was walking upon the sea, but that He was able 
to give the same power to others. He dared to ask for this power, 
in order that he might more quickly be with Jesus." 


Digitized by 


Google 



174 


8 . MATTHEW, XIV. 


a. If you take the words, if it be Thou, as certainly words of doubts 
then it must be said that by the expression bid me come unto Thee 
upon the water, Peter asked that that command should not be given 
him merely, but that it should be given with power, in such manner, 
indeed, that together with the command He should infuse such bold- 
ness and confidence, that he should not doubt that he would walk 
safely upon the waves, since Christ bade him. Wherefore as soon as 
he felt the water beneath his feet, straightway he perceived that it did 
not yield to him, but that he could walk upon it Thus Jansen : for 
God alone is able to glide into the mind, and to give it sure tokens of 
His presence, even though unknown to us, or unknown save to one 
who has experienced them, by which He makes the soul certain that 
it is He Himself who is speaking inwardly, and neither an angel, nor 
a demon. Such tokens the Prophets had when God revealed to diem 
things to come. For otherwise they would have exposed both God 
and themselves to ridicule had they declared as God's revelation, 
something about to happen, unless they had been certain that it was 
revealed to them by God, and not by the devil assuming the appear- 
ance of God. In this way, it happened to Peter. He asked of 
Christ both internal and external tokens of security, which should 
exclude all doubt from his soul, and Christ gave him those tokens, 
when he said, Come. By these tokens was Peter sure that it was the 
voice of Christ, and not of a phantom or a demon. 

If it be Thou, &c. Very beautifully does S. Augustine put the 
following words into Peter’s mouth : “ If it be Thou, I do not wonder, 
that Thou dost balance a solid body upon the liquid waves. Why 
should it be wonderful that the creature should serve its Creator? 
This I do not wonder at Do something that I may wonder at Let 
Peter walk. Make me to wonder. Bid me come to Thee upon the 
waves. For how should there not be for me a way on the sea, if 
Thou shalt give the command, since Thou for us wast made the 
Way.” 

Peter came down, &c. This was done in one of three ways. Either 
Christ, by His Divine power, kept up Peter, that he should not sink, 
as the angel kept up Habacuc by the hair of his head, and carried 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


WHO ARE FIGURED BY PETER. 


*75 


him to Babylon. Or else He did not allow Peter’s body to be suffi- 
ciently heavy to sink in the waves. Or else He made the waters to 
be firm and solid beneath Peter’s feet, like ice or crystal 
But when he saw the wind \ Sic. The strength of the wind caused 
Peter to fear : fear caused doubt : doubt gave rise to danger. Him 
whom faith bore upon the waves, doubt caused to sink. The cause 
was Peter’s little faith, as Christ tells him. He was afraid lest Christ 
should allow him to be drowned by the boisterous wind and the tem- 
pestuous waves. He had not as yet received the might of faith and 
love which he afterwards received from the Holy Ghost at Pentecost 
Christ permitted this, that Peter might recognise his own weakness, 
and might humble himself, and ask Christ to increase his faith, that 
he might become the rock of the Faith, according to the words, 
Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build My Church.’ 9 
So S. Jerome, Theophylact, and others. “ Peter,” says S. Chrysos- 
tom (Horn. 51), 44 did what was greater, for he magnanimously went 
down from the ship into the sea. But from the violence of the winds 
and the waves he was afraid, and failed in that which was less. For 
it is natural to man sometimes to overcome in things that are more 
difficult, and succumb in those that are less.” Lastly S. Augustine 
says, “in Peter walking upon the waters are figured those who are 
strong in faith, but in Peter doubting, those who are weak in faith.” 
Lord save me. From hence it is clear that Peter did not doubt 
that He who appeared was Christ For otherwise he would not have 
called upon Him in his great peril, but upon God, as shipwrecked 
sailors are wont to do. His only doubt was whether Christ would 
allow him to be buried in the waves. Well says S. Augustine (Serm. 
14. de verb. Dom.) “That shaking, brethren, was as it were the 
death of faith. But when he cried out, faith rose again. He could 
not have walked tfhless he had believed, neither could he have 
begun to sink unless he had doubted. In Peter therefore we must 
regard the common condition of us all, that if in any temptation die 
wind is about to sink us in the waves, we should cry aloud to 
Christ.” 

And straightway — wherefore didst thou doubt! Gr. elq rl ISioraa ac. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



176 


S. MATTHEW, XIV. 


Le., why didst thou divide thy mind in twot For two things were 
here presented to Peter, that is to say, the strength of the wind 
making him afraid of being drowned, and the voice of Christ instil- 
ling confidence and security. But the strength of the wind was more 
obvious, and therefore more powerful than the voice of Christ Thus 
its effect was in this instance to cause Peter’s faith to fail ; but he 
rose again after his lapse. 

Almost every temptation arises from distrust of God, because a 
man either trusts to himself, or to human aid, and does not imme- 
diately betake himself to God by prayer. Hence then let him who 
is tempted learn to turn away his mind from the thing which suggests 
the temptation, and turn it wholly to God, and fix it upon Him, 
and humbly implore his help. Very beautifully says S. Chrysostom,. 
“ Like as a young bird which, before it is able to fly, falls out of its 
nest upon the ground, whose mother quickly restores it to the nest 
so also at this time did Christ to Peter.” Therefore let him who is 
tempted, invoke Christ ; so shall he resist the temptation, and over- 
come it For if Peter had believed the word of Christ, he would not 
have doubted, nor have begun to sink. 

And when they had gone up , &c. S. John says (vi. 21.) "They 
wished to receive Him into the ship.” This means, say Jansen and 
others, that they recognised Christ by His voice, and being certain 
that it was not a phantom, they wished, i.e., they invited Christ to 
come into the ship ; and Christ complied with their invitation. They 
thought that when Christ was present in the ship, they would sail 
very rapidly, as they were accustomed to do. And this actually hap- 
pened, as soon as Christ was in the ship. For as St. John subjoins, 
and immediately the ship was at the land, whither they were going, 
namely, Bethsaida. This was a new miracle of Christ, that from 
the middle of the Sea of Galilee, a distance of three miles, they sud- 
denly, and as it were in a moment, arrived at the shore. There were 
therefore here four miracles of Christ The first : that He walked 
upon the waters. The second, that He raised up Peter, when he 
was afraid, and beginning to sink. The third, that He came into 
the ship, and stilled the tempest. The fourth, that He immediately 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



THB MYSTICAL SHIP. 


*77 


brought the ship from the midst of the sea to the shore. Thus, 
speaking mystically, does Christ by His grace make us to trample 
upon the loftiness of the world, thus does he make temptations cease, 
and bring us to the port of eternal bliss. 

Allegorically and tropologically. S. Augustine: “Let us think of the 
ship as the Church and the faithful souL The sea is this world. 
The wind and the waves are persecutions. When the wind arises, 
the ship is tossed : but because Christ is there, it cannot sink. But 
in these temptations let the yard-arm be raised, that, suspended to 
the mast, it may make the figure of the cross. To this yard-arm — 
that is, to the Cross of Christ — let a sincere conversation and a pure 
confession, like spotless sails, be attached. Let our sails be washed 
by the waves; let our garments be stretched out, that they 
may be found without spot or wrinkle. Lastly: after this ship 
has been built in Jerusalem, and has been sent forth into the 
midst of this roaring sea, the billows of the tempestuous waves, 
and the blasts of the raging winds — whilst they cany her about 
hither and thither — have borne her to the shores of every nation, 
and she has taken in a cargo of all the foreign merchandise which 
she has found. 19 

They came to the land of Genesar (Vulg.) : Mark has, of Gennesaret. 
S. Chrysostom and Lyra are of opinion this was the land ef the 
Gergesenes, whose inhabitants wished Christ to depart from them, on 
account of their swine which He drowned in the lake. But that 
Gerasa, spoken of in Matthew viil, is a different place from Genesar, 
the place spoken of here. Gerasa, or Gergesa, was on the eastern 
side of the sea of Galilee ; but Gennesaret was on the western 
side, in the direction of Capernaum and Bethsaida. For after 
Christ had fed the five thousand men in the desert of Bethsaida, 
and they wished to make Him a king, Christ, I say, fleeing from them 
commanded His disciples to pass over to the hither side of the bay, 
or the mountain of Bethsaida. This was the land of Gennesaret In 
other words, they returned to Bethsaida and Capernaum. Hence 
Mark says (cap vi.45.) “ He constrained His disciples to go into a ship, 
that they should go before Him across the strait to Bethsaida." S. John 

VOL. 11. N 


Digitized by 


Google 



6. MATTHEW, XtV. 


I 7 8 

(cap. vi.), says that the disciples also came to Capernaum, which was a 
city on the same bank. Thus everything becomes harmonious. 

The name Gennesaret signifies, flourishing valley . This city was 
formerly called Chinneroth, and from it the whole district derived its 
name, Ceneret, or Cenneroth. This by a trifling inflection became 
Genesar and Gennesaret . Hence the name of the adjacent Sea of 
Galilee, or lake of Genesaret. The Chaldee turns Ceneret into 
Genesar \ Listen to Josephus (lib. 3, de hello, c. 18). “The country 
of Genesar extends as far as the lake of the same name. Admirable 
both for its natural condition and its beauty. In addition to the 
pleasantness of the climate, it is watered by a most fruitful spring, 
called by the inhabitants Caphamaum." Adrichomius and S. Jerome 
fancied Ceneret or Genesaret were ’the same as the City of Tiberias. 
But they were mistaken. Besides Tiberias was a considerable dis- 
tance from Capernaum and Bethsaida. Lastly, Ceneret was in the 
tribe of Naphtali, as appears from Josh. xix. 35. Tiberias was in the 
tribe of Zabulon. And Ceneret was near Capernaum. 

Ana when they knew Him, &c. Instead of hem of His garment, 
the Syriac has tving, the Arabic, extremity of his garment. The flesh 
of Christ was so efficacious and health-giving as to communicate its 
virtue to the garment by which it was covered. From hence S. 
Chrysostom reasons, that if those who only touched the hem or fringe 
of Chrisf 8 garment were healed, how much more those who touch 
whole Christ, yea feed upon Him in the Eucharist What medicine 
can be more healing than the flesh and Deity of Christ S. Gregory 
Nazianzen relates that his sister Gorgonia was healed of a mortal 
disease by touching the Eucharist (Oral. 1 1). 

Lastly Christ took occasion from this multiplication of the loaves 
to utter His discourse upon the spiritual and Eucharistic Bread, which 
S. John gives at length in the sixth chapter of his Gospel 

In this chapter is finished the relation of the Acts of Christ from 
His second Passover to His third. That is of the second year of His 
preaching. This may be gathered from John vi. 4, where it is said 
these things were done about the time of the Passover. This was the 
third Passover of Christ’s preaching. For the First Passover is 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



THE PASSOVERS OP CHRIST. 179 

spoken of in John ii. 13 : the second in v. 1. ; and the third, as I 
have just said, in vi. 4. 

There remains therefore the third and last year of Christ's preach- 
ing, that is to say, His acts from His third, until His fourth and last 
Passover, when He suffered upon the Cross. 


a t 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



I 


180 


CHAPTER XV. 

3 Christ reproveth the Scribes and Pharisees for transgressing God's commandments 
through their own traditions : II teacheth how that which goeth into the mouth 
doth not defile a man. ai He healeth the daughter of the woman of Canaan* 
30 and other great multitudes : 3a and with seven loaves and a few little fishes 
feedeth four thousand men, beside women and children. 

T HEN came to Jesus Scribes and Pharisees, which were of Jerusalem, saying, 
a Why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the elders ? for they 
wash not their hands when they eat bread. 

3 But he answered and said unto them, Why do ye also transgress the com- 
mandment of God by your tradition ? 

4 For God commanded, saying, Honour thy father and mother : and, He that 
curseth father or mother, let him die the death. 

5 But ye say. Whosoever shall say to his father or his mother, It is a. gift, by 
whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me 5 
6 And honour not his father or his mother, he shall be free. Thus have ye 
made the commandment of God of none effect by your tradition. 

7 Ye hypocrites, well did Esaias prophesy of you, saying, 

8 This people draweth nigh unto me with their mouth, and honoureth me 
with their lips ; but their heart is far from me. 

9 But in vain they do worship me, teachingyfcr doctrines the commandments of 
men. 

10 H And he called the multitude, and said unto them. Hear, and under- 
stand: 

11 Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man : but that which 
cometh out of the mouth, this defileth a man. 

12 Then came his disciples, and said unto him, Knowest thou that the Pharisees 
were offended, after they heard this saying ? 

13 But he answered and said, Every plant, which my heavenly Father hath not 
planted, shall be rooted up. 

14 Let them alone : they be blind leaders of the blind. And if the blind lead 
the blind, both shall fall into the ditch. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



i8i 

15 Then answered Peter and said onto him, Declare unto ns this parable. 

16 And Jesus said. Are ye also yet without understanding? 

17 Do not ye yet understand, that whatsoever entereth in at the mouth goeth 
Into the belly, and is cast out into the draught ? 

18 But those things which proceed out of the mouth come forth from the 
heart ; and they defile the man. 

19 For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, 
thefts, false witness, blasphemies : 

20 These are the things which defile a man : but to eat with unwashen hands 
defileth not a man. 

21 H Then Jesus went thence, and departed into the coasts of Tyre and Sidon. 

22 And, behold, a woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts, and cried 
unto him, saying, Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou son of David ; my daughter 
is grievously vexed with a devil. 

23 But he answered her not a word. And his disciples came and besought 
him, saying. Send her away ; for she crieth after us. 

24 Alt he answered and said, I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the 
house of Israel 

25 Then came she and worshipped him, saying, Lord, help me. 

26 But he answered and said. It is not meet to take the children’s bread, and to 
cast it to dogs. 

27 And she said. Truth, Lord : yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall 
from their masters’ table. 

28 Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O woman, great is thy faith : be 
it unto thee even as thou wilt And her daughter was made whole from that very 
hour. 

29 And Jesus departed from thence, and came nigh unto the sea of Galilee ; 
and went up into a mountain, and sat down there. 

30 And great multitudes came unto him, having with them those that were 
lame, blind, dumb, maimed, and many others, and cast them down at Jesus’ feet ; 
and he healed them : 

31 Insomuch that the multitude wondered, when they saw the dumb to speak, 
the maimed to be whole, the lame to walk, and the blind to see : and they glorified 
the God of Israel. 

32 *f Then Jesus called his disciples unto him, and said, I have compassion 
on the multitude, because they continue with me now three days, and have nothing 
to eat ; and I will not send them away fasting, lest they faint in the way. 

33 And his disciples say unto him, Whence should we have so much bread in 
the wilderness, as to fill so great a multitude? 

34 And Jesus saith unto them. How many loaves have ye? And they said. 
Seven, and a few little fishes. 

35 And he commanded the multitude to sit down on the ground. 

36 And he took the seven loaves and the fishes, and gave thanks, and brake 
thorn, and gave to his disciples, and the disciples to the multitude. 

37 And they did aU eat, and were filled : and they took up of the broken meat 
that was left seven baskets fulL 

38 And they that did eat were four thousand men, beside women and children. 

39 And he sent away the multitude, and took ship, and came into the coasts of 
Magdala. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



S. MATTHEW, XT. 


l8l 

Then there came to Him , , Ac. The Scribes of Jerusalem, as being 
at the very fountain head of faith and religion, arrogated to than 
selves the right of censuring the doctrine of new teachers, such as 
Christ was. They sent therefore persons to investigate what His 
teaching was, that they might animadvert upon it, and bring Him into 
subjection to themselves. The Scribes prided themselves upon their 
knowledge of the law, the Pharisees upon their sanctity. 

Why do thy disciples , &c. Bread \ in this verse, is a common 
Hebraism for all kinds of food. Observe : Moses, in the old Law, 
enjoined, by God’s command, that the Jews should abstain from 
contact with the dead bodies of rapacious birds and unclean animals, 
from lepers and various other persons and things. And if any one 
touched them accidentally, he was accounted unclean ; and was not 
allowed to enter the Temple until he had performed the ablutions 
which the law prescribed. And these corporeal washings were en- 
joined for the purpose of adumbrating to the dense minds of the 
Jews those spiritual washings of the soul, which are effected by con- 
trition and repentance. (See what J have said on Lcvit. xi. 31.) 

The Jews then, but especially the Pharisees, who wished to be 
accounted more religious than other people, made their whole sanctity 
consist in such outward and frequent washings before their meals, 
yea even when they were taking their food, as seems to be here 
intimated. This was why, at the wedding-feast at Cana, there were 
placed six water-pots for these purificatory purposes. This was why 
they so frequently washed the cups and basons, out of which they 
ate and drank, yea even their beds and tables, as may be seen in 
Mark vii. 4. They were thus careful, lest if the vessels out of which 
they ate were polluted, they should contaminate those who ate out 
of them. But all this was merely done out of custom, since the law 
prescribed nothing of the kind. 

Observe 2. This excessive scrupulosity of the Jews was little, if 
indeed at all conducive to piety, or profit, since it kept them wholly 
intent upon external washings. And so it called off their minds 
from the interior care and purification of the mind from sin. Neither 
did God require of them this exceeding anxiety about external lus- 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



PHARISAIC TRADITIONS NUGATORY. 1 83 

trations; but seems rather to haye discouraged it (Deut. iv. 2), 
Christ therefore being about to put an end to these vain and frivolous, 
or noxious traditions, and being desirous of directing their whole 
attention to the purification of the mind, was unwilling to observe 
these ablutions, or to enjoin them upon His disciples, although He 
did not say so in express words, in order to avoid the envy and 
calumnies of the Pharisees. 

In vain, therefore, do the heretics object this passage against 
Catholics, as though it were opposed to Apostolic and Ecclesiastical 
traditions. For these last are most profitable and spiritual, and were 
instituted and handed down by the Apostles and their successors for 
the more perfect observance of the Law of God. The other traditions 
were Pharisaic, that is futile, erroneous, and contrary to God’s Law. 
Yea, the Scribes even preferred them before the Divine Law, and 
observed them in place of it This is plain from the 9th verse. 
So SS. Jerome, Chrysostom, and others. All this becomes obvious 
rom the Talmudists, who in the book called, The Hundred Benedic- 
tions, declare that the hands must be previously washed and wiped, 
or else the bread which is eaten is judged to be unclean. And water 
must be presently poured three times upon the hands, first washing 
the fingers, and then the whole hand. Lastly, it is necessary 
that in this ablution the left hand should act as a servant to the right 
Such were their nugatory triflings. Moreover, the Pharisees, as S. 
Justin testifies (contra Tryph.\ were called Baptists. See S. Epiphanius 
(lib. #. Hares. 1 7) where he says that there was a certain sect of Scribes 
and Pharisees, who used to baptize themselves every day in the year. 
For this reason they were called Daily Baptists. They thought a 
man could not live unless he was dipped in water every day, and by 
this means washed and purified from every fault There are some 
Jews among the Rabbies who practise the same rites even at the 
present day. But this is to live the life of ducks and fishes, rather 
than of men. 

Jesus answered ’ &c., for the sake of your tradition. Arabic, for the 
sake of your ordinances. Instead of, for the sake of some translate* 
through. But the meaning is the same in both ; viz., your traditions 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


184 


8. MATTHEW, XV. 


set at nought and violate the Law of God. Therefore they are false 
and impious, and ought not to be observed. 

Note the word, your . Your traditions were not instituted by God, 
or His Saints : nor by the ancient Patriarchs and Prophets. They 
were only invented in recent times by the Scribes and Pharisees, 
your predecessors. And you wish to maintain them, not from love 
and reverence for them, but because ye have come into their place, 
and because ye would arrogate to yourselves power and authority to 
ordain similar traditions. But there are Divine and Patriarchal 
traditions, which must be in every way observed. They are, that the 
Books of Moses, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Daniel, and the rest of the Pro- 
phets are Canonical : that God is One in Essence, Three in Person : 
that sins are blotted out by true contrition arising from the love of God : 
that infants are guilty of original sin, and therefore must be cleansed 
by the Sacrament which God has ordained, and so on. These tradi- 
tions ye ignore, or make of none effect, O ye Scribes ; being wholly 
taken up with your own traditions. 

For God hath said. Gr. ivmiXaro, i.e., has commanded. Honour, 
&c. Honour in this place, as elsewhere in Scripture, signifies not 
only reverence , but help, almsgiving, sustentation. This is plain from 
what follows. 

And whoso curseth, &c. Arabic, Whoso speaketh an evil word 
against his father, or his mother. Die the death, Le., die certainly, 
and without any hope of pardon. The meaning is, If he who only 
reviles his father, or his mother in words, is by the Law guilty of 
death, how much more he who injures them in deed, and deprives 
them of that sustentation which is due to them by the law of nature; 
and not only deprives them, but authoritatively teaches others to 
deprive them of it, as ye do, O yc Scribes, by your teaching about 
Corban, as will be seen in the following verse : 

For ye say, &c., profited by me : understand, such a person does 
well , and shall fulfil the law of God. The meaning is — Whatsoever 
gift I shall offer, or vow to God, this shall be profitable ; both to my- 
self and to thee, O my father, or my mother, in both mind and 
body. For God, pleased with this gift, shall, in return, liberally 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



corban: what? 


>«5 


bestow gifts upon thee and me, and shall provide for your sustenance. 
By this manifold and specious semblance of religion and a vow, the 
Scribes taught that alimony might be refused to parents, if the value 
of it were offered to God. And they did this to bring gain and profit 
to themselves. For many of the Scribes and Pharisees were priests, 
who received the offerings made to God. Now in this matter they 
were manifestly in error, in that the bond and law of piety, by which 
children are bound to provide for their parents when poor, is of the 
law of nature, and therefore every vow, every offering, and all ties 
ought to yield to it Thus if anyone devoted his property to God, 
and his father were to fall into poverty, his property must be given 
to his father, not to the Church. Yea, a son cannot enter a Religious 
Order if his parents are in extreme want ; and even if he have 
entered, he is bound, in such a case, to come out of it, in order that 
he may succour them. So teach D. Thomas, Sylvester, Navarre, 
Toletus, and other doctors, in their explication of cases arising under 
the fourth commandment { 7 he Anglican Fifth). Wherefore S. 

Augustine, as Possidonius testifies in his life, (c. 14), refused inherit- 
ances that were offered by some persons to his Church ; because he 
saw it to be right and just that they should be enjoyed rather by the 
children, or parents, or relations of the deceased. Some legacies 
also that were offered by parents he restored to their children, when 
they desired them. And he added that “ legacies ought to be offered 
rather than required.” 

Observe : gift in Heb. is |mp corban, as in Mark viL n. The 
word is frequently used in Lev. cap. 1, 2, 3, &&, where lambs, goats, 
and calves, offered to God are called corban , Le., an oblation. Hence 
the Treasury, into which offerings were cast by the people was called 
corban, or corbana. (See Matth. xxvii. 6.) Therefore the covetous 
Scribes taught the people to offer their property to God and the 
Temple, and to say to their parents when in want, corban. This was 
much the same as saying, like the Belgians to poor people, when 
they ask alms, Godt helpe u; or as the French say, Dicu vous aide. 
This is a way of saying that they are unwilling or unable to help them 
themselves. Moreover, by saying corban, they shut their parents* 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


1 86 


& MATTHEW, XV. 


mouths, by instilling into them scruples of conscience, lest they 
should deprive God of His own corban, His own offering. It was 
as if they said, this is sacred, it is vowed and dedicated to God. 
Take care then, my father, that you do not commit a sacrilege, by 
asking it for your own use. When the parents heard this, they were 
thunder-struck, and preferred to die of hunger, rather than be sacri- 
legious towards God. 

And honour not , &c. These words are best taken as those of the 
Scribes, rather than of Christ They gave it as the reason why a 
child need not succour his parents, that he preferred God to them, 
and honoured God with the gift which should have been given to them. 
Whence Mark has, and suffer him no longer to do ought for his father 
or his mother. 

Ye have made void, Gr. iju vp&trare, Le., ye have made obsolete, abro- 
gated. Observe the word your, for there are three kinds of traditions. 
The first are Divine, being such as God has sanctioned by His com- 
mand, even though they are not found in Scripture. Such a tra- 
dition is — that infants must be baptized. For this is no where 
written, but is the constant tradition of the Church. The second 
are Ecclesiastical, which the Church, that is, her pontiffs and pre- 
lates have commanded, such as the ceremonies of the Sacraments ; 
also feasts and festivals. And these are not so much human as 
Divine traditions, because the Chinch is governed by the Holy Ghost. 
The third are civil These are sometimes good, and sometimes bad, 
because contrary to the law of God ; such as these traditions of the 
Scribes about corban. 

And calling the multitude, &c. — understand, I will teach you con- 
cerning the real purity, or impurity of the soul, that ye maty unlearn 
what the Scribes have taught you, that the soul is made unclean by 
unclean hands or unclean food. 

Not that which — defiles: Gr. koivoI, Le., makes common, Le., defiles 
For unclean meats were common to everyone, even to the unclean. 
But clean meats were only for the clean, for these alone might eat 
them. Hence common has the same meaning as unclean. This is 
plain from Acts x. 15. He means, The Scribes teach you, O people. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



STORY OP A TURK. 


187 


that it is not lawful to eat with unwashen hands, because unwashen 
hands make the food unclean; but unclean food makes the soul 
unclean, that is, displeasing to God- But they are in error, because 
not that which from without enters into the mouth defiles the man, 
but that which comes forth from the mouth, from within, and so 
from the heart For sin must be voluntary, or else it is not sin, as 
S. Augustine says. So, too, virtue — if it be not voluntary — is no 
virtue. 

This error of the Scribes originated in what is said in Lev. xl, 
where pork and other unclean meats are called execrable and 
abominable, and are said to pollute the soul Whence, in verse 42, 
it is forbidden to pollute the soul with unclean food. And in verse 
44 it is said, “ Be ye holy (that is, clean in eating), for I am holy ” 
— i.e. y clean. And shortly afterwards, “ Pollute not your souls with 
any creeping thing by eating it” The Scribes took all these things 
ignorantly, as though the meats themselves brought pollution on 
the soul, in that the soul touched them in the stomach, during the 
process of digestion. But they were in error, because that unclean- 
ness was legal and corporeal, but did not pollute the mind with sin. 
Food is not capable of sin, but the will alone. Since, therefore, 
food possesses no sin in itself, how can it infect the soul with sin ? 

Pythagoras and Plutarch (Tract, dc esu cam. ct l. viiL Sympos. c. 10) 
teach that people should abstain from flesh and beans, because they 
contaminate the souL The Turks say the same of wine, which is 
forbidden them in the Koran. Busbequius, the imperial ambassador 
to the Sultan relates that he saw a Turk who, on wine being offered 
him — which he was greedy to drink — raised a great shout. He was 
asked why he did so. “I am calling out,” he said, “ to my soul to 
go down from my stomach into my feet, that it may not be polluted 
with the wine, forbidden by our law, which I am about to drink.” 
Thus, in the time of Christ and the Apostles, the first heresiarchs 
(who arose from among the Jews, as Simon Magus, Satuminus, and 
afterwards Manes, Mardon, and the Encratites) taught that wine and 
flesh were not created by God, but by the devil, and were therefore, 
in their own nature, evil and to be avoided. Some of them said, 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



1 88 


S. MATTHEW, XV. 


that with the flesh of the animal they ate its soul, and that that soul 
had the gift of reason, and was therefore pious or impious. Hear 
S. Epiphanius (Hares. 64) : “ Manes says that he who eats flesh 
eats a soul, and is bound to become of like nature with it; so that 
if he eat a bull, he will become a bull; if he eat pork, he will 
become a pig.” Speaking of these, the Apostle says, imposters shall 
come, who will teach u to abstain from meats, which God hath 
created to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe 
and know the truth. For every creature of God is good, and 
nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving.” (1 Tim. 
iv. 3, 4.) See what I have there said. Wherefore the heretics wrest 
this passage against the fasts ordained by the Church. For the 
Church does not forbid flesh on fast days because flesh is evil in 
itself, but with the object ot restraining gluttony, and of exercising 
penance and obedience. If, therefore, anyone eats flesh on a fast 
day, he does not sin on account of the flesh, but on account of 
his disobedience to the Church. In like manner, if the Jews ate 
pork or other forbidden food, they polluted their souls, not with 
the pork, but by their disobedience. 

Then His disciples , &c., then, viz., when the multitude being sent 
away, Christ had come with His disciples into the house. This is 
plain from Mark vil 17. Were scandalised \ Le., were offended , 
because the Pharisees made all their holiness consist in external 
washings, and such like things. 

But he answered, &c., plant, to., seed, shrub, tree, by which 
SS. Hilary and Chrysostom understand doctrine. That is, He means 
the doctrine of the Pharisees concerning unclean food polluting the 
soul, shall be by Me confuted and rooted up. But by plant others 
understand more correcdy men. For these were planted by God in 
Paradise, but being corrupted by the serpent, are planted anew by 
God with Christ, who is the tree of life. They are planted through 
faith and grace, and then they bring forth the fruit of good works 
unto eternal life. Otherwise, they remain barren and corrupt trees, 
meet to be cast into the fire, as John the Baptist threatened the 
Pharisees. For they were always the enemies of Christ, and 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



INTO THE DRAUGHT. 1 89 

consequently of God the Father. Thus S. Jerome and Origen 
(Ham. I. injerem .), Maldonatus, and others. 

Let them alone, &c. He means, let the Scribes be scandalised. 
Do not be troubled that they are ofiended at my doctrine and 
correction. They themselves are blind. They do not see the light 
of truth and of faith which I set before them, but in their blind- 
ness and error, whereby they make sanctity consist in washing 
and other external things, they are obstinate and incorrigible ; 
and are leaders of the blind, namely, of the people, to whom 
they teach this error, and would drag with themselves into the 
pit of destruction. Wherefore I openly demonstrate this their 
error to the multitudes who are as yet capable of being enlightened 
and corrected, that they may beware of it Christ here teaches 
that the scandal of the Pharisees is to be despised, when, forsooth, 
anyone is scandalised and offended by his own malice and perverse 
obstinacy. For, as S. Gregory says, “ If offence be taken at the 
truth, it is better that scandal should arise than the truth be 
abandoned ” {Horn, vii in Ezek .). 

Peter answered, &c. This parable, meaning the one where Christ 
said, not that which entereth into the mouth, &c. 

Without understanding, in not perceiving that purity or impurity 
consists in things which pertain to the mind, especially in such 
things as angry words, in cursing and perjury, which proceed out of 
the heart, through the mouth? 

Do ye not understand . . . into the draught, &c. Porphyry, and 
Julian the Apostate, from these words took occasion to charge Christ 
with being ignorant of physiology, as S. Jerome tells us. For not 
all the food which enters into the mouth goeth out into the draught, 
but the better part of it is converted into the substance of him who 
eats it, for his nourishment and increase. & Jerome answers them 
as follows, w Whilst they attempt to show another’s ignorance, they 
make an exhibition of their own. For although liquid food and light 
moisture be poured into the body, yet when they have done their 
office in the veins and limbs, and have passed through the secret 
passages of the body, which the Greeks call irbpovc, they descend to 
the inferior parts, and go into the draught.” 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



3. MATTHEW, XV. 


190 

But this statement must be received subject to limitations. For all 
food, but not the whole of the food, and only with respect to its 
faecous portions goes into the draught The first digestion of the food, 
and its conversion into chyle takes place in the stomach, from whence 
those portions which are useless for the purposes of nourishment 
are emitted into the draught A second digestion takes place in the 
liver, where the chyle is converted into blood. A third digestion 
may be said to take place in the various members of the body, 
which assimilate the blood received into the veins from the liver 
and convert it into flesh. Then there is a separation of the useless 
portions by means of the pores, and they are expelled in the form 
of sweat This is why Mark adds, Goeth out into the draught \ purging 
all meats. Christ's meaning therefore is— unclean food does not 
pollute the soul, as the Scribes teach, for what is unclean and impure 
in the food goeth out into the draught : that therefore which remains is 
pure, and is converted into pure chyle, blood and flesh. Therefore 
it cannot defile a man, nor through him, his soul. 

This saying of Christ gave rise to the error of the Master of Sen- 
tences, who teaches that all men derive from Adam a tiny particle of 
flesh, and in this manner contract from the same Adam, original sin, 
in which all have sinned. {Rom. v.) He says that this particle is 
self-multiplied, and increased by itself— as though it alone were each 
man’s substance — but not by means of food. For food only warms 
this particle, but is not its aliment , nor does it increase it, but 
wholly goes forth into the draught, as Christ here saith. And that 
this particle alone shall arise at the last day. Hence too he gathers 
that Christ, although he was bom of Adam, yet did not contract 
from him original sin, because that particle which He derived from 
Adam was pure, and free from every vice and sin. All this he en- 
deavours to prove from these words of Christ But he is refuted at 
length by S. Thomas (i p. q. ult. art. i.) For even though Adam 
had possessed a body as big as a mountain it would not have been 
large enough to contain as many particles as would be required for 
each of so many thousands of millions of men who are descended 
from him. Again those particles must be corruptible, since all flesh 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



SOURCE OP EVIL. 


191 

soon becomes corrupt Wherefore the greater portion of the human 
race derive none of their material part from Adam : yet do they con- 
tract from him original sin, because they were reckoned up in him 
according to natural generation, (causaliter), because they sprung from 
him, as his children, by continuous descent 

Lastly CEcolampadius impurely and foolishly twists these words of 
Christ into an argument against the real Presence of the Flesh of Christ, 
in the Eucharist He says, “ If the Flesh of Christ be our food, then 
like food it goeth out into the draught, which is horrible to think of,” 
But Roffensis answers him (lib, 5. cap, 29.), by saying that the Body 
of Christ in the Eucharist exists in an indivisible and impassible 
manner, and when we eat It, It is not divided, nor altered, nor 
digested, as common flesh is digested, consequently it has no worth- 
less parts to go out into the draught For the whole process of 
digestion and change takes place in the species of bread and wine, 
not in the Body of Christ 

But that which proceedeth from the mouthy &c. The hearty ie, 9 the 
reason and the will, whose symbol, yea, their seat and workshop the 
heart is. For the heart supplies the vital and animal spirits which 
are necessary for the intellect in order to understand, and for the will 
in order to love. Indeed Galen teaches that our common sense 
(sensus communis), which is directly subservient to the understanding, 
resides in the heart Aristotle, with more probability, thinks it 
resides in the brain. But the heart subserves the brain, and supplies 
the spirits. 

Proceed evil thoughts , &c. As from a fountain water bursts forth, 
so from the heart, i,e. t from the will, when it is depraved by luxury, 
or imbued with anger, there flow out evil thoughts of lust, or 
revenge. They burst forth in the mouth, by means of speech : and 
from the mouth they break out into deeds, when we carry our words 
into action. 

These are the thing which defile a man , &c. This is the conclusion, 
setting forth the scope and object of the parable, which is to shew 
tnat neither unclean hands, nor unclean or unwashed food defile 
men but an impure and depraved will alone. From hence it is plain 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



S. MATTHEW, XT. 


193 

that the Scribes thought that the unclean or unwashed food itself 
defiled the soul of the eater, as I have said on the second and third 
verses. For apart from such an idea, Christ does not find fault with 
the action of washing the hands before meals, considered in itself. 
For this is a custom which has prevailed amongst all nations from the 
most ancient times, both for the sake of health, and to put the guests 
in mind of inward purity. 

As Virgil says: 

“ The bread in baskets servants bring ; 

Napkins, and water from the spring.” 

To sit down to table with unwashen hands is considered dirty and 
boorish, and a cause of disgust to a man’s fellow guests. Wherefore 
in old time, not only Priests, but all the faithful were wont to wash 
their hands before prayer. Hence the words u Washing pure hands ” 
(r. Tim. 2. viii.). # For formerly the faithful received the Eucharist 
in their hands, not in their mouth. See what I have there said. 

Moraliter. Learn from these words how everyone’s heart ought to 
be prepared, adorned and kept, forasmuch as it is the workshop of all 
evil and all good, of every vice and every virtue. As that elder said, 
who is quoted by John Moschus, " Be the doorkeeper of thine 
heart” And Solomon, Keep thine heart with all diligence, for 
out of it are the issues of life and death.” (Prov. iv. 23.) 

And Jesus departing from thence , &c. He came into Phoenicia, the 
capital of which was Tyre, on the borders of the Holy Land ; for 
Tyre was more to the south, Sidon to the north. Many, both from 
Tyre and Sidon, who were stirred up by the fame of the doctrine and 
miracles of Christ, flocked to Him in crowds. 

And behold a woman of Canaan , &c. A Canaanite, not of Cana 
in Galilee, but one of the posterity of Canaan, the son of Ham, the 
son of Noah. The Canaanites were of the seven nations of Palestine. 
They dwelt near the coast, as appears from Numb. xiii. 29, and were 
expelled by Joshua, but not entirely. They remained in Phoenicia, 
that is to say in Tyre and Sidon, which the Hebrews were never able 
to capture. Sidon, the founder of the city of that name, is called 

• Our author here seems to have read lavanUs washing, for levanta lifting 
op, (Trana.) 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



LOUD VOICE A SIGN OF EARNESTNESS. 


193 


(Gen. x. 15.) the first-born of Canaan, the son of Ham. The 
Canaanites therefore are the same as the Phoenicians. For this reason 
the LXX, in Joshua v. 1. instead of kings of Canaan } translate, kings 
of Phoenicia. Mark(vii. 26.) calls this woman, a Syrophoenieian, because 
she was from that part of Phoenicia which borders upon Syria, or 
father because Syria includes Phoenicia and all the adjacent countries 
which lie between the Mediterranean Sea and the river Euphrates. 
Moreover Mark calls her a Greek. She was called a Greek, although 
she was a Syrian, because in the New Testament especially by S. Paul, 
all Gentiles are called Greeks. (See Pom. i. 17. Gal. hi. 28.). This was 
because of the wide extension of the Greek language, which in time 
became extended to Syria. 

Cried aloud. A loud voice is a sign of earnestness and desire. 
Have mercy upon me , that is upon my daughter, whom 1 love as 
myself. Her torture is my torture. Yea, rather would I be 
tormented myself, than behold her tormented. If you will 
have mercy upon her by her deliverance from the devil, it will 
be the same as though you had shown mercy unto me. Parents 
have greater love for their offspring than children have for their 
parents. 

Son of David \ Le., O thou Messiah, whose special work it is to 
have pity upon the wretched, and to cast out of them the demons, 
and to restore men to themselves and to God, even as the Prophets 
have foretold, and the Jews proclaim with united voice. This woman 
of Canaan knew that Christ was Messiah, partly by common report, 
partly by a Divine instinct 

Vexed by a devil : Arab, has an evil demon. For the devil tor- 
ments, tears, excruciates the members of such as he possesses to their 
own great pain, and the horror of the beholders. He afflicts their 
souls with dreadful phantasms and spectres, and with griefs and 
fears. For the devil has an intense hatred against God, and conse- 
quently against man, who is the image of God. And so he injures 
and torments him to the utmost of his power. 

The woman does not add, Come and deliver her. She only repre- 
sents her affliction to Christ She leaves the rest to His providence 
vol. 11. o 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



194 


S. MATTHEW, XV, 


and His love. In this she shows her marvellous resignation, and 
her confidence in Christ 

He answered her not , &c. That He might prove and augment 
her faith, hope, humility and constancy : and, as S. Chrysostom says, 
that he might set her as an example to others. 

And His disciples . • . Send her away , i.e., by giving her what 
she asks, the deliverance of her daughter. She crieth after us. 
Deliver her from the pain and labour of following our footsteps, 
and us from the misery of hearing her, lest she deafen us. But, 
“ from the pleading and fervent heart, groans unutterable are 
emitted, whereby Christ is soothed, as with sweet music,” says 
S. Augustine. 

You may observe, Mark says, she came into the house y and there fell at 
the feet of Christ S. Augustine says (de consens. Evang. /. ii. c. 49), 
that she first came to Christ in the house, as Mark relates, and that 
afterwards when He went out of the house she followed Him, and 
continued to beseech Him. But it seems more probable that she 
first met Christ in the way, and afterwards made supplication to Him 
in the house. 

But he said . . . lost sheep ; Vulg. sheep which have perished. 
Arab, wandering sheep . Syriac, sheep which have wandered from the house 
of Israel . It was as though He said. To the Israelites alone Christ 
was promised, that they should be His flock, that I as their shepherd 
in bodily presence, should feed them alone. Whence Christ is called 
by S. Paul, “the Minister of the circumcision," of the Jews. 
{Rom. xv. 8.) 

She came and worshipped Him y &c., Le., knelt down before 
Christ When this woman of Canaan was rejected by Christ, 
she did not stand back, nor cast away hope. She persisted 
more eagerly, she was more hopeful, she cried more loudly. 
And by this her constancy and perseverance she deserved to be 
heard. For God, when He is invoked, often does not answer at 
first, in order that he who is praying may be yet more earnest 
For God will refuse nothing to those who persevere, as is plain 
from the example of this woman. For, “she was persistent 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



WHO ARB DOGS. 195 

in prayers, wise in her answers, faithful in her words.” says 
S. Ambrose. 

He answered, it is not meet , Gr. coA by, that is, fair, becoming. 
Christ speaks after the manner of the Jews, who were wont to call 
the Gentiles, as being vilest idolators, dogs. This is the second re- 
pulse of the Canaanitish woman by Christ, and sterner than the first 
He pricks her, as it were, by calling her a dog, to whom it is cus- 
tomary to throw crusts of bread. By bread He means not corporeal, 
but spiritual bread, namely the grace of the Gospel and of His 
miracles. For these were promised to the Jews alone, as to sons 
of God. Mark adds that Christ said, suffer the children first to be 
filled Xw like manner Christ often humbles and mortifies holy 

souls, that they may ask yet more humbly and ardently, that they 
may obtain. Wisely says S. Chrysostom (Horn. 30 in Gen.) 
‘‘Whether we obtain what we ask, or do not obtain, let us persevere 
always in prayer. And let us give thanks, not only when we obtain, 
but even when we suffer a repulse. For when God denies us any- 
thing, it is no less a favour than if He granted it For we know 
not as He knows what is good for us.” 

But she said, yea Lord, &c. She means to say, “It is altogether 
true what Thou sayest, O My Saviour. I acknowledge that I am 
a worthless dog, and not worthy that the children's bread should be 
given to me, who am a Gentile. Yet the dogs and the curs (in 
Greek the word is the same, Kvvapia) are wont to eat the crumbs 
of bread which fall from the tables of their master's children. 
Nourish me then as Thy dog. I cannot leave my master’s table. 
You cannot drive me from Thee either by rough words or by blows. 
I will not leave Thee, until thou give me what I ask. Give me 
therefore, O most merciful Lord, only a crumb, give me this least 
favour of my daughter’s health. Let this one crumb fall among us 
Gentiles, and I will gather it up.” She presses Christ prudently, 
convincingly, and yet modestly by His own words; and by her humble 
faith and reasoning conquers Him willing to be conquered by her 
prayer, says S. Chrysostom ; and S. Jerome says, “ ‘ I know,’ are her 
words, ‘ that I do not deserve children’s bread, nor to receive whole 

o 2 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


196 


S. MATTHEW, XV. 


food, nor can I sit at the table with the father, but I am contented 
with the leavings of the dogs.*” 

Moraliter: Contemplate the ideal of perfect prayer, and imitate 
it This woman of Canaan teaches us to pray. 1. With great 
humility^ in that she acknowledges herself to be a dog. a. With 
faith) because she calls Christ the son of David, i.e., the Messiah, the 
God and Saviour promised to the Jews. 3. With modesty because 
she sets before Christ the right of dogs and her own miseiy ; yet 
does she not draw from thence the conclusion that Christ should heal 
her daughter, but leaves that to Him. 4. With prudence, in that she 
takes hold of Christ by His own words, and gently turns His reason* 
mg against Himself, into an argument for obtaining her desire. 5. 
With reverence , with religion and devotion, because she made her 
supplication on her knees. 6. With resignation in that she did not say. 

Heal my daughter,” but “ help me? in the manner which shall seem 
to Thee best 7. With confidence^ , because although a Gentile, she 
had a firm hope that she would be heard by Christ 8. With 
ardour. 9. With charity) in that she made intercession for her 
daughter, as if she were anxious for herself, saying, help me. ia 
With constancy and perseverance, in that she persisted when she was 
twice repulsed and became yet more earnest in prayer. Truly says 
Chiysologus (Serm. 100.) “ Deservedly is she adopted as a 

daughter, and raised to the table, who in her humility placed herself 
tfeneath the table.” S. Laurence Justinian, the first Patriarch of 
Venice imitated this woman, who prayed thus to God when he was 
at the point of death. “ I dare not ask for a seat among the happy 
spirits, who behold the Holy Trinity. Nevertheless Thy creature asks 
for some portion of the crumbs of Thy most holy table. It shall 
be more than enough for me, O how much more than enough ! if 
Thou wilt not refuse some little place to this Thy poor servant 
beneath the feet of the least of Thine elect” 

Then Jesus , &c. Mark has, for this saying go thy way, the devil 
is gone out of thy daughter. Christ would not restrain any longer 
His admiration, but cried out as it were with wonder, O woman 
great is thy faith. As S. Chrysostom says, He would adorn her 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



THE DAUGHTER IS THE GENTILE CHURCH. 197 

with a shining crown. Let it be done to thee as thou wilt , Le., what 
thou askest These words says Chrysostom are like those in the 
first chapter of Genesis. Let there be a firmament, and it was done. 
Whence it follows, her daughter was healed See here the efficacy 
of fervent prayer, as Jacob wrestled with the angel and overcame 
him, and obtained the blessing which he asked. Therefore was he 
called Israel, that is, having power with God. Prayer therefore 
makes us Israels, having power with God. 

Tropologically , the daughter vexed by a devil is a soul that is 
tempted and polluted by sin, which ought to distrust its own strength 
and trust in Christ It ought to invoke Him with humility, acknow 
ledging itself a dog (that is, a vile sinner), yet not so as to despair of 
pardon. It becomes a great physician to cure great diseases, and 
the great God to do great works, and the great Christ to sanctify and 
save great sinners. 

Allegorically , this daughter is the Gentile Church. The Jews, 
who were formerly the children, because of their unbelief in Christ 
became as dogs, according to the words, “ Many dogs are come about 
me” (Ps. xxiL 16); but the Gentiles, which were dogs, have been 
made children, and eat at Christ’s table the bread of the Eucharist 
and the hidden meaning of Scripture, as it were the marrow and 
fatness of the wheat So S. Jerome. 

And her daughter, &c. Mark has, she found the child lying upon 
a bed, taking rest, securely and joyfully. The sinful soul, when 
delivered by the pardoning grace of Christ rests upon the bed of a 
tranquil, serene, and joyful conscience. 

And when Jesus had passed over, &c. As S. Jerome says, “ He 
went up into a mountain, that, like a bird, He might stir up His 
tender young ones to fly.” And Rabanus : “That He might lift up 
His hearers to meditate upon supernal and heavenly things. He sat 
down, that He might show rest is only to be sought for in things 
above.” 

And there came to Him, &c. The Gloss explains mystically 
thus — “The dumb are those who do not praise God. The blind 
are those who do not understand the way of life. The lame are 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



S. MATTHEW, XV. 


198 

those who do not go along the straight road of good works. 19 
Excellently says blessed Peter Chrysologus (Serm. 50): “ Christ 
came to take our infirmities, and to give us His strength; to 
seek things human, to give things divine; to receive injuries, to 
confer dignities; to bear wearisomeness, to bestow healing. For 
the physician, who does not bear with infirmities, knows not how 
to heal. And he who is not weak with the weak, cannot make the 
weak strong.” 

They glorified the God of Israel \ because He had shown unto them 
Messias, the worker of so many blessings and miracles. 

But yesus, having called His disciples , &c. “For he would,” 
says S. Jerome, “feed those whom He had healed.” Thus perfect 
were Christ’s works of mercy, and He would teach us to do likewise. 
I have compassion^ Greek, tnr\ayx^(ofiai 9 Hebrew dthd on, am 
merachem — i.e. t I am moved and have pity in my inward bowels 
upon this multitude, who are suffering hunger for My sake ; for they 
have followed Me fasting for three whole days. See here the burn- 
ing desire of the people after Christ They were so intent upon His 
doctrine that they even forgot their food. Moreover, Christ takes 
care of, first their souls, then their bodies. Let a prelate and a 
pastor do the same. It belongs to Christ’s providence to fulfil His 
own declaration, “ Seek first the kingdom of God and His righteous- 
ness, and all these things shall be added unto you.” Thus S. 
Charles Borromaeo, forgetful of himself, devoted himself wholly to 
the service of his people. At the time of the forty hours’ prayer, 
he spent the whole of the forty hours in church, preaching, praying, 
and celebrating, without sleep or food, as is related in his Life. So 
intent was his mind upon God, that he did not feel hunger. He 
fed upon faith and charity, according to the saying of Christ to the 
Samaritan woman : “ My meat is to do the will of Him that sent 
Me and to finish His work.” 

They have continued with Me> &c. “Although,” says S. Chry- 
sostom, “when they came, they had food, yet it was now 
consumed. Wherefore He did not do this miracle on the first, 
or the second day, but on the third, when nothing was left, that 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



tttE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LOAVES. t$() 

they first being in need might receive with larger desire what 
was done.” 

And His disciples , &c. The Arabic is, whence shall we find bread 
in the desert which shall satisfy this multitude t 

And Jesus said, &c. Syriac, a small quantity of little fishes. 

Mystically. S. Bernard in his sermon on the Seven Loaves takes 
them to mean the seven gifts of God. “ The first loaf f he says, “ is 
the word of God, in which is the life of men, as He Himself testifies. 
The second loaf is obedience : since My food, He- says, is to do the 
will of God. The third loaf is holy meditation, concerning which 
it is written, cogitation shall preserve thee. ( Vulg .) In another 

place it seems to be called the bread of life and understanding. The 
fourth loaf is the weeping of those who pray. The fifth is the 
labour of repentance. The sixth loaf is the pleasant unanimity of 
companions. It is a loaf formed of many grains, leavened with 
the wisdom of God. The seventh loaf is the Eucharist For the 
bread, He says, which I give, is My flesh, for the life of the world.* 
The same S. Bernard in a subsequent sermon interprets the seven 
loaves of the mercies of God* The first mercy , he says is that He 
hath preserved me from many sins, into which I should otherwise 
have fallen. The second, that He hath overlooked the sinner and 
his sins. The third, that he has excited me to repentance ; the fourth, 
that He hath received the penitent to favour. The fifth, that He 
hath given grace that I should not fall back into my former sins. 
The sixth, that He hath given the gift of good living. The seventh, 
that He hath given to me unworthy, to venture to hope for 
Heaven. 

And they all ate, and were filled — seven baskets — as many as there 
were loaves. As much bread remained as there was offered to Christ 
at the first, indeed more, since each basket (sporta) which is an or- 
dinary load for a man, as carried in the hand, would contain more 
than one loaf. Indeed Francis Lucas is of opinion that a sporta 
(tncvplba) contained two cophini ; and was a load for two. The Arabic, 
however, for seven sporta translates seven ccphinu Christ wished 
the fragments and the crumbs to be collected, both in memory of the 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



260 


ft. MATTHEW, XV. 


miracle, and that nothing of God's gifts should be lost, and also that 
He might teach us to be careful, and to use God’s creatures and 
food with frugality. From this command of Christ it is a constitu- 
tion in some religious orders that everyone should collect his own 
crumbs in a dish. Hear what is related in the Life of S. Odo, 
Abbot of Cluny. “All carefully collected the crumbs when the 
bread was cut, and received them with a benediction before the end 
of the lection. When the lesson was finished no one ventured to take 
either these crumbs or any other food. They looked upon the 
crumbs as more holy than other food on account of the miracle.” 
This miracle is also related of a monk at the point of death, who 
had not ate his crumbs according to the custom, when he was in 
health, but suffered them to fall from the table; the devil often 
showed a little bag full of crumbs, and terrified the man, and forced 
him to cross himself and cry out From that day forward the crumbs 
were collected with great care. Another miracle is related that the 
crumbs in the hands of a certain religious, who had carefully pre- 
served them, were turned into pearls, which were afterwards made 
into an ornament for the Church. S. Francis in a vision beheld 
himself collecting the crumbs of bread ; and being ordered from 
Heaven to make them all into one host, and distribute it amongst 
the brethren, he saw those who refused it, marked with leprosy. 
By and bye he received from God the following explanation of his 
vision : the crumbs are the words of the Gospel, the host is the Rule, 
the leprosy is iniquity. 

And when He had sent away the multitude . . . into the parts of 
Magdala. The Vulgate has Magedan. Magedan is a town beyond 
the sea of Galilee, near Gerasa. The district is now called Mage- 
dena, says S. Jerome (lods Hebr.) Mark (viii. io), instead of Mage- 
dan has Dalmanutha, either because the place had two names, as S. 
Augustine thinks, and some codices of Mark have Magedan instead 
of Dalmanutha ; or rather because there were two places or towns 
near one another, and Christ came to the confines of both when He 
came to the shore which pertained to each town. Some persons 
are mistaken in thinking Magedan to be the same as Megiddo, where 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



IfAGDALA. 


aoi 


king Joriah was slain. Megiddo is on this side the Sea of Galilee, 
and far distant from Magedan. It is nigh the brook Kishon, and 
borders on Caesarea and the Mediterranean. This verse belongs to 
the following chapter; for it was at Magedan the Scribes asked for 
\ sign from Heaven. 



Digitized by v^,ooQle 



aot 


CHAPTER XVI. 

4 The Sign of Jonas. 5 The Leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees. 21 
Christ foreshemeth his Death. 

T HE Pharisees also with the Sadducees came, and tempting, desired him 
that he would shew them a sign from heaven. 

2 He answered and said unto them. When it is evening, ye say, It will be fair 
weather ; for the sky is red ; 

3 And in the morning, It will be foul weather to-day ; for the sky is red and 
lowring. O ye hypocrites 1 ye can discern the face of the sky ; but can ye not 
discern the signs of the times ? 

4 A wicked and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign ; and there shall no 
sign be given unto it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas. And he left them, and 
departed. 

5 If And when his disciples were come to the other side, they had forgotten to 
take bread. 

6 Then Jesus said unto them, Take heed, and beware of the leaven of the 
Pharisees and of the Sadducees. 

7 And they reasoned among themselves, saying. It is because we have taken no 
biead. 

8 Which when Jesus perceived, he said unto them, O ye of little faith, why 
reason ye among yourselves, because ye have brought no bread ? 

9 Do ye not yet understand, neither rememl>er the five loaves of the five thou- 
sand, and how many baskets ye took up ? 

10 Neither the seven loaves of the four thousand, and how many baskets 
ye took up? 

11 How is it that ye do not understand that I spake it not to you concerning 
bread, that you should beware of the leaven of the Pharisees anil of the Sad- 
ducees. 

12 Then understood they how that he bade them not beware of the leaven 
of bread, but of the doctrine of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees. 

13 % When Jesus came into the coasts of Cesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples* 
saying; Whom do men say that I, the Son of man, am ? 

14 And they said. Some say that thou art John the Baptist ; some, Elias ; and 
others, Jeremias, or one of the prophets. 


Digitized by 


Google 



15 He saith unto them. But whom say ye that lam? 

16 And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the 
living God. 

17 And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona : 
for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in 
heaven. 

18 And I say also unto thee, That thou art Peter ; and upon this rock I will 
build my church ; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it 

19 And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven : and whatso- 
ever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven ; and whatsoever thou 
shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. 

20 Then charged he his disciples, that they should tell no man that he was 
Jesus the Christ 

21 From that time forth began Jesus to shew unto his disciples, how that he 
must go unto Jerusalem, and sufier many things of the elders and chief priests and 
scribes, and be killed, and be raised again the third day, 

22 Then Peter took him, and began to rebuke him, saying, Be it far from thee, 
Lord : this shall not be unto thee. 

23 But he turned, and said unto Peter, Get thee behind me, Satan : then art an 
offence unto me : for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those that 
be of men. 

24 T Then said Jesus unto his disciples, If any man will come after me, let 
him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me. 

25 For whosoever will save his life shall lose it : and whosoever will lose his 
life for my sake shall find it 

26 For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his 
own soul ? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul ? 

27 For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his father with his angels ; 
and then he shall reward every man according to his works. 

28 Verily I say unto you, There be some standing here, which shall not taste 
of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom. 

And there came unto Him Pharisees , &c. They had previously 
asked for a sign (xii. 38). But here again they asked for one because 
of the miracle of the multiplication of the loaves. For when they 
perceived that this miracle was celebrated by the multitudes who 
had been partakers of the bread, they called it an earthly sign, and 
insinuated that Christ was a magician, and by the help of the devil 
(who rules on the earth) had multiplied the loaves, and performed 
His other miracles. This may be gathered from chapter xii. 24. 
They ask, therefore, of Christ a sign from Heaven — that God, Who 
reigns above, would by it give attestation that Christ was sent by 
Him. And that if He did it, they would believe Christ to be the 
Messiah. But the Sadducees, who were atheists, thought no sign 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



204 


S. MA1THEW, XVI. 


could be given from Heaven by God, who in their opinion had no 
existence. Lyra explains otherwise. He is of opinion, that the 
Jews were given to judicial astrology, and asked a sign of Christ, 
whereby He should show from the stars that He was Messiah. They 
thought that God had pointed out, and as it were written in the 
stars, all His providence about human affairs, and the whole order 
of the universe. But Matthew here intimates nothing of the kind. 
The Pharisees really seem to have alluded to the manna, as may be 
collected from John vi 30, 31. As though they said, u O Jesu, 
Thou hast indeed multiplied bread upon earth, but give a sign from 
Heaven. Rain down manna from the sky, as Moses did ; so shalt 
Thou show Thyself like unto Moses, and the new Law-giver sent by 
God.* So Remigius, Bede, Abulensis. 

But he answered, &c. The physical reason of this is, that the 
redness of the sky or the atmosphere indicates that the clouds are 
not dense, and therefore will be dissipated during the night, and 
consequently the following day be serene or free from clouds. For 
red is an intermediate colour between black and white. The black- 
ness of the clouds signifies that they are thick and dense, so that 
the rays of the sun cannot pierce through them. Their whiteness 
shows that they are of very great rarity, so that the sun’s rays shine 
through them. The redness of the clouds indicates that they are 
not altogether dense, or rarified, but are becoming so. 

And in the morning, it wtU be foul weather — rain or vnxA—fot 
the sky is red and lowring . The Greek word is the same as in the 
preceding verse — wuppafc c, Le., is ruddy, orv yvafav, Le., a sky bringing 
sorrow . The physical reason is that if the sky be red in the morn- 
ing, it indicates that there are indeed only a few clouds, but that 
they are so dense that they cannot be dispersed by the rising sun. 
Wherefore, when the sun ascends and waxes hot they are resolved 
into rain or wind, rather than are driven by Him elsewhere. Hear 
what Pliny says about the signs of the weather (lib. 18 , c. 35 ) : If 
the sun set clear, it is a sign of fine weather. If he set with a 
clear sky, and rise in the same way, it is a certain sign of fine 
weather. If the sun appear larger at sunrise than at sunset; if he 


Digitized by v^ooQle 


THE SIGNS OF THE TIMES. 


*05 

rise with a bluish tinge, or set in the same way, it is a sign of rain; 
if of a fiery colour, it betokens east wind. When the clouds are 
red before sunrise, there will be wind When they are grey, or 
dark intermingled with red, it is a sign of rain. 

Symbolically: Abulensis says {guast. 9.) In the firstadventof Christ 
there was the serenity of grace : in His second advent there shall 
be the storm of vengeance and of hell, which God shall cause to 
thunder against the reprobate. 

Ye can discern the face of the sky, Le., its external form and ap- 
pearance. The signs of the times. These are the signs of the time 
of Messiah’s advent, or of the times, i.e., of the seventy weeks of 
Daniel, of the prophecy of the Patriarch Jacob (Gen. xlix. 10.), and 
the rest of the Prophets. For these prophecies, together with the 
miracles, which Christ was working every clay plainly proved that 
Messiah was already come, and that He was Messiah. This verse 
must be read as an interrogation, not as Lyra reads as a negative 
assertion. He explains thus, ye Jews are given to astrology, and ye 
wish by means of the stars to discern the time of Messiah’s advent. 
But ye are in error. For by the stars may be derived presages of 
fine weather, or of storm, but not of the advent of Messiah. But 
this is a mistake. The argument in this place is from a minor to a 
major, thus, “If from the signs of Heaven ye know how to discern 
coming fine weather, or a coming tempest, much more can ye and 
ought ye from the oracles of the Prophets and My miracles to recog- 
nize Me to be Messiah.” So SS. Hilary, Jerome, Euthymius. It 
is also plain from Luke xii. 56, where Christ says, Ye hypocrites 
ye can discern the face of the sky and of the earth : how isit ye cannot 
discern this timet i.e., of My advent Thus in like manner there are 
many in the present day who are lynxes in earthly things, moles in 
things Divine : prudent in the world, foolish for Heaven, of piercing 
sight in heaping up money, most ignorant in the worship of God. 
Their wisdom is in their purse, they are very dull in matters of con- 
science. S. Chrysostom gives another explanation ( Horn. 54.) “ There 
are signs of the present time, and there are other signs of what is to 
come. The signs of healing which I show are of time present : but 


Digitized by v^ooQle 


ao6 


S. MATTHEW, XVI. 


the signs of the future shall be the signs in Heaven for which ye are 
now asking, O ye Scribes. For then there shall be signs in the sun 
and in the moon, and in the stars. (Luke xxi. 25.) Ye therefore act 
like Thales, who gazing at Heaven whilst he was walking, fell into 
a ditch. Thus also ye gazing at the future, and neglecting the 
present time of grace, are going headlong to destruction/’ 

An evil generation, &c. Christ repeats this verse, which we have 
already explained in chap. 12. 

And having left them , &c. From Magedan He passed over the 
Sea of Galilee, and returned to its hither bank, as appears from the 
following verse. Again and again did Christ pass over this sea, that 
He might teach the Galileans who dwelt on either side of it, accord- 
ing to the prophesy of Isaiah ix. 1. 

And when His disciples , &c., had come , Gr. i\ 06 vre c, i.e., when they 
had gone, meaning when they had ascended into the ship to cross 
over; for it is plain from the circumstances that this happened in 
the ship. For in the ship, and in sailing they would require food, of 
which they would find abundance in the harbour. The expression 
is a Hebraism. For the Hebrew verbs often denote an action not 
completed, but begun, or intended. So here, when they had come^ 
Le., when they had begun to come, when they were going they forgot, 
because the need of bodily refreshment had escaped their memory, 
through dwelling upon the company of the Lord, and the sweet- 
ness of the true bread, which was with them, i.e., Christ. So says 
Anselm. 

Beware , Gr. Spare, Le., see of the leaven, Le., of the doctrine as He 
explains verse 12. Of this leaven He bids them beware, not in that 
the Pharisees taught and expounded the law of Moses : for in that 
respect He says they were to be heard and obeyed. But so far as 
they corrupted it with their own vain traditions, contrary to the law 
of God, and which were like sour leaven. By these traditions they 
infected vhe minds of their hearers. Luke (xii 1.) calls it hypocrisy, 
take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy . For they 
had regard only to outward ceremonies and apparent sanctity, and 
neglected the purity of the heart S. Jerome says, this is the leaven, 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



LEAVEN OF THE PHARISEES. 


207 


of which the Apostle speaks. “ A little leaven leaveneth the whole 
lump.” Thus heretical doctrine, if it once cast the least spark into 
thy breast, will in a short time grow into a mighty flame, and take 
possession of the whole man. 

But they reasoned, &c. Hugo and Dionysius expound thus : 
Christ said, beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, because we have 
not taken bread, and He does not wish us to accept bread from them. 
Others take it more simply, thus : When the disciples heard Christ 
speak of leaven, they remembered that they had not taken any bread 
into the ship; and being afraid lest Christ might sail as he was 
accustomed, to some desert place, they were anxious to procure some 
loaves, and were disputing about it among themselves, perchance one 
throwing the blame of forgetfulness upon another. In this they com- 
mitted two faults. First they were too anxious about the bread, and 
did not sufficiently trust in Christ, whose power and providence they 
had experienced but a little while before. The second fault 
was that they thought Christ was speaking of earthly leaven 
and bread, when He was speaking of what was spiritual. 

But when Jesus knew it, &c. He knew this by the power of His 
Divinity ; for He had not heard them speaking about this thing. Of 
little faith, as if I were speaking of earthly bread, for which I would 
have you anxious ; or as if I were unable or unwilling to provide 
bread for you, either on board the ship or in the desert. 

How many baskets (sportas), &c. Since Matthew as well as Mark 
invariably calls these baskets sportce, and the baskets of the former 
miracle cophini, it is clear that sportce, were a different kind of vessel 
and measure from cophini. 

That I spake not to you concerning biead, &c. For from leaven 
bread is commonly made. Ye ought to have known from My words 
and deeds that I was not speaking of earthly bread but of spiritual, 
that is to say, of doctrine. 

Then they understood, &c. Christ's reproof sharpened their under- 
standing. 

When He was come Cesarea Philippi. This was a town of 

Phoenicia, situated at the foot of Lebanon. It was previously called 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


S. MATTHEW, XVI. 


208 

Dan, because it had been captured by that tribe : and because two 
streams, named Jor and Dan, there unite and form the river Jordan. 
But because the name of Pan, the god of shepherds, was better 
known to the Gentiles than the Hebrew tribe Dan, the place was 
called by them Patteas. Afterwards, Philip, the son of Herod of 
Ascalon, who was tetrarch of Ituraea and Trachonites, enlarged it and 
made it the capital of his tetrarchy, and called it Cesarea, in honour 
of Tiberius Caesar. It must be distinguished from the Cesarea 
between Dor and Joppa, which is called in the Acts absolutely 
Cesarea of Palestine. It was the boundary of Canaan, as promised 
by God to the Israelites towards the north, as Beersheba was its 
boundary on the south. Many of the neighbouring Gentiles flocked 
to this city. Therefore Christ retired to it upon this occasion, that 
He might teach the Gentiles as well as the Jews, and that He might 
speak with more freedom about the Messiah. For in Judea it was 
perilous to speak upon this subject ; since the Scribes were ready to 
accuse Him to the Roman governors of aiming at royal power, and of 
treason against Caesar. Again this city had been a seat of idolatry, 
(Judges xviii. 29, &c.). Christ therefore wished to cleanse it from 
this stain, and to bring it to the worship of God, yea to be the begin- 
ning and the matrix of Gentile Christian nations. It is now in the 
possession of the Turks, and is called Belima. 

Whom do men say , &c. *>., whom do they say that I, who out of 
humility, am wont to call Myself the Son of Man, am? And 
especially I now so call Myself, that I may examine your faith con- 
cerning Me, O ye Apostles. The Syriac less correctly divides the 
sentence, in this manner, What do men say conaming Me , that I am 
the Son of Man ? For Christ does not here ask whether He be so 
called, but asserts that He is the Son of Man, and goes on to ask 
what further men think about Him. 

But some said • • • or one of the Prophets . The common people 
among the Jews were aware that for several hundred years Prophets 
had failed to be amongst them, together with the ark of the covenant 
and the oracles from the mercy seat Thus they thought that Christ 
was not a new Prophet, but one of the ancient Prophets. For in 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


fefcTURtf 0* EttAS. 


* 6 $ 

Christ they beheld their virtues, their miracles and their doctrine 
Few indeed were they who believed with certainty that He was the 
Messiah* By fax the greater number did not believe They were 
offended at His humility and His poverty. They thought Messiah 
would come with regal pomp as the Son of Solomon ; as the Jews 
still think and expect Wherefore although some of the people had 
recently said, when they saw so many miracles done by Christ, “ Is 
not this the Son of David?” and, “This is indeed that Prophet which 
should come into the world;” yet this was a sudden and transient cry, 
elicited by beholding a miracle, not a firm and settled opinion : thus 
Abulensis. They thought that the soul of one of the Prophets had 
passed into Christ by metempsychosis. So Jansen and Baronius. 
Or more probably they thought one of the prophets had risen again, 
and Jesus was he ; as though Jesus were really John the Baptist, 
Elias, or Jeremias: For the Pharisees and the Jews generally 
believed in the resurrection of the dead. This indeed is plain from 
what Herod said of Christ : This is John himself who is risen from 

the dead , and therefore mighty works do show themselves in Him. Some 
thought Jesus to be John the Baptist, because he appeared to be very 
like him in age, in sanctity and in his preaching. And since John 
had been shortly before put to death by Herod, he was fresh in their 
memory, and seemed to be worthy of rising again. Others thought 
Christ was Elias, on account of the like zeal in both ; and because 
Elias was not yet dead, and was expected by all the Jews to return 
according to the prophecy of Malachi (iv. 5) : “ Behold, I will send 
you Elijah the prophet.” They thought therefore that Elias had re- 
turned, and that Jesus was he. Others were of opinion that Christ 
was Jeremiah, because Jeremiah was a most holy man, and a mirror 
of patience and charity ; and because some thought Jeremiah would 
return with Elias to preach to the Jews, being moved by those words, 

I have given thee for a prophet to the Gentiles.” (Jer. i. 5.) 

Jesus saith to them , but whom do ye, &c. From the words but you, 
S. Jerome gathers that Christ here tacitly, as it were, calls the 
Apostles gods. “ They indeed, because they are men have human 
ideas, but ye, who are gods, whom do ye think that I am?” But 
VOL. il p 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



S. MATTHEW, XVl. 


MO 

S. Chrysostom says with regard to the subject itself “The Lord by 
His second auestion admonishes His disciples to think more loftily 
concerning Him. By the very manner of His interrogation, He 
shows that those common opinions fell far short of His dignity. You, 
He says, who have been always with Me, and who yourselves have 
done so many miracles in My name, whom do ye say that I am?” 

Simon Peter answering, &c. He who was called Simon when he 
was circumcised, was by Christ named Cephas, i.e., Peter. Some 
think Peter, as it were the mouth of the Apostles, answered not for 
himself alone, but for all. So S. Jerome, also Anselm, S. Thomas, 
the Gloss, Dionysius, Lyra, Jansen, and S. Augustine. Also S. Am- 
brose (/. de Incam . c. 4). With more probability S. Hilary, Abulensis, 
Maldonatus, Francis Lucas, Barradi, and others think Peter spoke 
for himself, and his own feeling. For the other Apostles being silent, 
and hesitating what reply to give, Peter being wiser than the rest, for- 
asmuch as he was taught of God, and being more fervent, lest any 
one should answer unworthily concerning Christ, dashed in with his 
answer, and replied on behalf of all : not because he knew the mind 
of all, for he had not spoken with them concerning the matter, but 
because he wished that his own opinion should be common to them 
all This was what S. Jerome and the others who have been cited 
really meant, namely, that Peter, as about to be constituted after the 
resurrection the Prince of the Apostles and of the whole Church, 
being more deeply taught and inspired by God, recognized the 
Divinity of Christ, and answered concerning it what all the rest 
would have answered. This is plain, because to Peter only, as the 
reward of this confession, Christ promised the most ample reward and 
prerogative. For he says to him by name above the rest of the 
Apostles, “ Blessed art thou Simon Bar-jona,” &c. 

Thou art the Christ , &c. Gr. h Xpierfa, with the article. Thou, I 
say, art the Christ, or Messiah, ie., anointed by God with the unction 
oi the grace of the hypostatic Union with the word, and by this con- 
secrated the Chief Doctor, High Priest Prophet, and King of the 
world. Doctor, that Thou mayest teach men the will and law of God : 
High Priest, that by offering Thyself a sacrifice to God, Thou mayest 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



S. PETER'S CONFESSION. 


211 


reconcile the world to God ; a prophet , that Thou mayest declare the 
secret things of God, and foretell things to come : a king that Thou 
mayest rule over Heaven and earth, and all the things which in them 
are. 

Son of God: Not by grace and adoption, as all the saints are sons 
oi God, but by nature and the Deity communicated to Thee by God 
the Father, by eternal generation. Wherefore the Greek has the 
definite article, 6 vide, i.e., that Sony viz., the only natural son, of 
one substance with the Father. IAvingy who thus, formaliter lives the 
Divine, uncreated and beatific life, that causalitery He breathes into 
all things created by Him, His own strength and vigour, and into 
living things, life and a soul. For from Him, as from a fountain and 
a sun of life, there floweth all the light and life of all angels, men, 
animals and plants. See what I have said on S. John i 4. Thus 
S. Leo (Serm. de Transfig) : “ The divine Peter, by the revelation 
of the Heavenly Father, overcoming corporeal things, and trans- 
cending things human, beheld the Son of the Living God, and 
confessed the gloiy of the Deity.” Thus too S. Chrysostom, Hilary, 
Theophylact, Euthymius,S. Augustine, and Athanasius (Serm. 3. contra 
Arian.), and others, passim , who from this passage prove the Divinity 
of Christ 

Moreover SS. Hilary and Chrysostom and others are of opinion 
that S. Peter first of all men confessed the Divinity of Christ. 
Others deny this, saying that Nathanael confessed it before Peter, 
when he said, Rabbiy Thou art the Son of God \ Thou art the King 
of Israel. Nevertheless it is plain that before this confession ol 
Peter the Apostles acknowledged Christ to be God from His very 
words, and from the many and great miracles which He wrought to 
prove it We see this from the words of Peter (John vi. 65 ), “ Lotd 
to whom shall we go ? Thou hast the words of eternal life. And we 
believe and are sure that Thou art that Christ the Son of God.” Also 
from the words of the Apostles themselves, “Verily Thou art the 
Son of God.” (Matth. xiv. 33.) But the Apostles, inasmuch as they 
were uninstructed, had formed a very confused and poor conception 
of this doctrine, and believed, after a sort, that Christ was truly the 

p 2 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


aia 


8. MATTHEW, XVL 


Son of God, above other Prophets, yea that He was God. But after 
what manner this was so, whether by eternal generation, or by some 
other way they were ignorant But Peter being enlightened by God, 
recognized it distinctly, clearly, and sublimely, and first being asked 
concerning this thing, openly and constantly confessed the same and 
testified in this place, that verily, Christ was peculiarly the Son of 
God, that is begotten of God the Father by eternal generation, and 
therefore consubstantial with Him, and very and eternal God. Christ 
required this faith concerning Himself from Peter and the Apostles 
— for the Apostles tacitly approved Peter’s confession, and tacitly 
confessed the same — as well because that faith is the foundation of 
our justification, as because the Passion and Death of Christ were at 
hand, in which it was needful that the Apostles should be sustained 
by this faith in the Divinity of Christ ; lest when He was dead, they 
should think faith and all other things were dead with Him. This is 
plain from verse 21, &c. 

Jesus answered and said unto him y Blessed art thou Simon Bar-jona , 
for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but My Father which 
is in heaven. That is to say, blessed and happy art thou, O Peter, 
on account of this new faith concerning Me ; for this is a mighty gift 
and benefit, not of flesh and blood, that is, not of nature, but by the 
grace of God inspiring and revealing to thee this very thing. For 
this faith is the beginning and the foundation of all grace and glory, 
and therefore it shall lead thee, and many through thee and thy 
example and preaching, to eternal blessedness. For blessedness in 
the journey standeth in the faith and love of Christ : but the blessed- 
ness of the country is the vision and fruition of the same, according to 
those words of S. John for “ this is life eternal, that they may know Thee 
the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom Thou hast sent” Hence the 
synod of Ephesus (Act III.) says, “ Thrice most blessed and worthy 
of all praise is the Apostle Peter, who is the rock and the base of the 
Catholic Church, and the foundation of the true faith.” Hence also 
has arisen the custom of the faithful of addressing the Pontiff “ Most 
Blessed Father.” Hence S. Jerome saith to Pope Damasus, “ I am 
united to thy Blessedness,” that is, to the Chair of Peter. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


MEANING OF BAR-JONA. 


913 


Simon Bar-jona. For the father of Simon Peter was called 
Johanna, that is John, as is plain from S. John xxL 15, meaning “ God 
hath given: or God hath pitied: or the gift of God, from 1 la 9 
which is contracted from Jehovah, and * chanan * that is, he hath 
fritted, he hath given." Peter, then, was the son of John, or the grace 
of God, because he was most pleasing to God, and full of His grace. 
S. Chrysostom observes, that Christ gave the addition “ Bar-jona,” 
not only according to the Hebrew custom, which always adds the 
name of the father to the children, but with a special reference to 
Peter's answer, as though Christ confirmed it and said, “Thou hast 
spoken truly, O Peter, that I am the Son of God, for as thou art the 
son of Jona, a man from a man, according to natural generation, so 
am I the Son of God the Father, but begotten of Him from eternity 
— God of God, of one substance and Godhead with Him.” Symboli- 
cally Jona, that is “ a dove,” is the emblem of the Holy Ghost, who 
in the form of a dove came down upon Christ In this place also 
he descended upon Peter, and revealed to him that Christ was verily 
and indeed the Son of God. Thus S. Jerome — “ Peter obtains a 
name from his confession, because he had a revelation from the Holy 
Ghost, whose son he was to be called.” Bar-jona in our language 
signifies “the son of a dove" “For flesh and blood hath not revealed 
it unto thee” — that is, not earthly parents nor friends nor any man 
who consists of flesh and blood has revealed unto thee that I am the 
Son of God — forasmuch as this knowledge far transcends all nature, 
and the natural knowledge of all men, but My Heavenly Father hath 
made it known to thee by the illumination of His grace. “ What 
flesh and blood could not reveal, has been revealed by the grace of 
the Holy Ghost,” saith S. Jerome. By flesh, S. Hilary understands 
the bodily eyes of S. Peter, for they had told him that Christ was a 
man, but the revelation of the Father alone had made known to him 
that He was God. 

And Isay unto thee that thou art Peter , and upon this rock I will build 
my Church. “And I,” in Greek, yb” i.e., but I, or now I, give back 

to thee as a reward, and I in turn say and promise : for as S. Jerome 
saith, “Christ pays back the testimony of the Apostle concerning 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



214 


S. MATTHEW, XVI. 


Himself.” Peter had said, u Thou art the Christ— the Son of the living 
God; 99 this true confession received a reward, namely, “ Thou art 
Peter.* I therefore who am the very Son of God as thou hast con- 
fessed, I the Son oi God tell and assure thee, and by saying it, I 
make and constitute thee, Peter, so that after Me thou mayest be- 
come the rock of the Church. Christ had promised this name to 
Simon (S. John i. 42), saying, “ Thou shalt be called Cephas, which 
is interpreted Peter : 99 but in this place He fulfils the promise, and 
gives him the name of Peter in fact S. Leo (Ser. ///., Annwer. 
Ascens.) thus expounds : “ And I say unto thee, that even as My 
Father hath made known to thee My excellency, so do I also make 
known to thee that thou art Peter, inasmuch as I am the inviol- 
able Rock, &c., so likewise thou art a rock, because thou art strength- 
ened by My strength, and the things which are Mine by My own 
power are thine by participation with Me." 

Thou art Peter , and upon this rock I will build My Church. 
The meaning is, thou art Peter; that is, the rock of the Church: for 
upon thee as upon a most solid rock I will build My Church : for 
the Word declares and gives the reason why he is Peter, that is to 
say, “ Thou art Peter, because upon thee as upon a rock I will build 
My Church.” S. Augustine ( Tract 27, upon John , and B. 1 Retraci y 
C. 1) says, “ Upon this Rock, that is upon Myseh, because the rock 
was Christ,” 1 Cor. x. 4. Calvin, (B. 4, Inst. c. 6), and the heretics 
eagerly follow this interpretation, that they may overthrow the autho- 
rity and the primacy of Peter and the Pope But that Peter himself 
is here called the rock, the rest of the Fathers almost universally 
agree. Maldonatus and Bellarmine (B. 1, concerning the Roman 
Pontiffs c. 10) quote them at large. The meaning then is this, thou 
art “ Kepha or “ Cephas 99 t\e. 9 a rock or a very hard and very firm 
stone, for this is the signification of the Hebrew “ Kephf and of the 
Chaldee and Syriac u Kepha 99 marked out and ordained by Me, that 
after My death, and the gift of the Holy Ghost at Pentecost, having 
been entirely solidified and made strong, thou mayest become the 
foundation of the Church which I will build upon thee. For before 
the coming of the Holy Ghost, Peter was very far from being the rock 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



CHRIST BUILDS UPON PETER. 


*15 

of the Church ; yea through fear he denied Christ in His Passion. 
So then the word “ Peter,” and “ Petra,” denotes the firmness of S. 
Peter as a prince of the Church, and of his successors the Pontiffs, 
and their constancy in the faith and religion of Christ Thus among 
others, Angelus Caninius on the Hebrew names of the New Testa- 
ment c. xiii. i. 

Moreover, that Peter is here called the Rock, is proved first, by 
the pronoun “ this,” upon “ this rock ; ” for since “this ” is demon- 
strative it ought thus to be understood, viz. : — this rock of which I 
have spoken, and to whom I speak, i.e., thou art Peter the rock of 
the Church, and upon thee as upon a rock I will build My Church. 
For there had been no mention made of any other rock to which the 
pronoun “ this ” could refer, except Peter. It is otherwise in 1 Cor. 
x., for there it is said “they drank of that spiritual rock which fol- 
lowed them, and that rock was Christ” Here the word rock precedes, 
which he explains by saying, that it was so, typically, that is to 
say, represented Christ : as if Christ had spoken in French He 
would have said “ Tu es Pierre , et sur cest pierre je bastiray mon 
eglise” 

You may say, Christ said not thou art petra , but thou art Petrus , 
and so deny that the pronoun this refers to Peter. I answer, that 
Christ is said to have spoken in Syriac, thou art kepha , and upon this 
kepha 1 will build, &c. For kepha means a rock, and hence Peter in 
Syriac was called kepha. But the Greek translator, who is followed 
by the Latin, gave the masculine form of the noun — namely petrus 
rather than petra , which is feminine : but wirpoc and rcr/m in Greek 
equally signify a rock or a stone. Peter therefore is the same word 
as petra , but the translator made a variation for the sake of elegance, 
and rendered it thou art Peter and upon this petra, not upon this petros , 
as in a true and proper sense he might have done, both because petra 
in Greek is more frequently used for a rock or a stone than petros , 
and because houses are properly built upon stones, not upon men. 
Beza allows this when he says “ the Lord speaking in Syriac did not 
make use of a surname, but said cepha in both places, as in the ver- 
nacular the word pie*r. is used both as a proper and a common noun. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



ti6 


S. MATTHEW, XVI. 


In Greek, likewise, werpoQ and wirpa differ only in their termination, 
not in their meaning.” Thus far correctly, but mistakenly he adds, 
“ Matthew, or whoever was his translator, seems by this difference 
of interpretation to have intended that Peter, who is a part of the 
building, should be distinguished from the rock itself on which the 
building stands, that is from Christ ; likewise that Peter himself should 
be distinguished from the promise of the faith which is common to 
the whole Church, as ancient writers also clearly prove, in order that 
Antichrist (so the heretics calls the Roman Pontiff) may become most 
ridiculous when his followers endeavour to establish his tyranny from 
this passage.” How petulantly and falsely Beza writes may be seen 
and learnt from the original passages of the Fathers which Bellar- 
mine and Maldonatus cite, as I have already said. Besides, the text 
of Scripture itself is to be preferred to the translator : nor had the 
Greek translator a meaning different from the Syriac text, as I have 
previously said. I omit many other proofs, which either from what 
has been said, or from what will be said, will show the falsity of 
Beza's conclusion. 

Secondly— The same thing is plain from this, that there would be 
a want of connection to say thou art Peter and upon Myself the Rock 
I will build My church. In this indeed there would be a lessening 
of the speech, and an overthrow of the benefit bestowed. For Peter 
might say to Christ, “ I am Peter, that is the rock of the Church, 
how then dost thou build Thy Church not upon me but upon 
Thyself?” 

Thirdly— Because all that goes before and that follows refer to 
Peter alone : “and I,” he saith, “ say to thee, O Peter, that is, I give 
and assign to thee as the reward and prerogative of thy great 
faith and confession, that after Myself, and after My death and 
resurrection, I will make thee the rock and foundation of the 
Church f for this is the meaning of I will build My Church ” 

Fourthly— Because the original oriental versions agree together in 
this, that petrus is the very same word as petra, and petra as petrus, 
whence they give the same name Kepha to Petrus and Petra. Christ 
therefore as Angelus Caninius says, spoke thus in Syriac : ant kepha , 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


TESTIMONY OF THE ANCIENT VERSIONS. 


217 


veal kep ha hodden ebne tot tstbburi ; or as the Syriac Gospel has it, 
ant Au Alpha* veal hada kipha ebneleidti \ that is, thou art Cepha * that 
is a rock, and upon this Cepha * that is petra* meaning upon thee, 
who art Peter or a rock, “Twill build my Church ” Moreover, the 
Hebrew Gospel, which Sebastian Munster has edited as authentic, 
and as written by S. Matthew himself, has in like maimer atta 
kepha* veal kepha hazzot ebne eth machdi. So also the Armenian 
Gospel : Is bim 9 he saith e vera ais bim* that is, thou art a rock* and 
upon this rock Twill build * &c . ; and the Arabic Gospel, ant alsachra 
va ala hada* alsachra abni baidti '* thou art a rock* and upon that rode 
I will build my Church. The iEthiopic Gospel has Anta quoqueh va 
dibazati* quoqh annesa lebcita Christianei * that is, thou art a rock and 
upon this rock I will build the Christian house — that is the Church. 
The Coptic also has, but I say unto thee that thou art this Pieter* I 
will found my Church upon this rock* which is none else than this 
Peter, otherwise there would be no connection, for he gives the 
reason, the because* why he will build the Church upon a rock, be- 
cause indeed Peter will be a solid rock on which the whole Church 
being founded may rest securely as upon a strong foundation. The 
Persian is, “ I say unto thee that thou art sanac*” Le., a rock* “ and 
upon this sanac * 9 that is, rock, “ I will build my Church.” Moreover, 
the Persian paraphrast explains sanac as a rock, adding, thou art the 
rock* that is* foundation and judge. ( Vide Peter Victor in Annotat. 
adN T.pp. 105, 102, where he gives at length all these versions.) 

To S. Augustine it is replied that he was misled by his ignorance 
of the Hebrew and Syriac languages, and therefore thought that 
petrus was something different from petra* and that Peter was as it 
were called appellatively from it Petreius* although it appears from 
the Syriac that Petrus and Petra are the same. Again, S. Augustine 
admits as probable the explanation of those who say that Peter is 
the rock of the Church ; and in this respect he is at issue with 
Calvin, who is of opinion that such an explanation is blasphemy 
against Christ Listen to S. Augustine in his sermon on the Chair 
of Peter. “ Lastly, for strengthening the devotion of the churches he 
is called the rock ; as saith the Lord, ‘ thou art Peter, and upon 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



2l8 


8. MATTHEW, XVL 


this rock I will build My Church for he is called the rock because 
he first laid the foundations of the faith for the nations, and like an 
immovable rock he holds the joints and the superstructure of the 
entire Christian edifice. Peter then is called a rock on account 
of devotion, and the Lord is called a rock on account of strength ; 
as saith the Apostle, ‘they drank of that spiritual Rock which followed 
them, and that Rock was Christ 9 Rightly does he deserve an asso- 
ciation in name who had obtained an association in work. Peter 
lays the foundation, Peter plants ; the Lord gives the increase, the 
Lord waters." The same Augustine (Serm. 16 de Sanctis ) says, 
“Worthy was Peter to be a foundation for budding up the people ot 
God, to be a pillar for support, a key to the kingdom. 99 

In fine, even if that exposition of S. Augustine were allowed, al- 
though it is not the true one, still it may thence be proved that 
Peter, after Christ, who is the Rock and Comer Stone of the Church, 
is still the next foundation, rock, or stone of the Church. For then 
the sense would be, I am the Rock upon which I will build the 
Church; but thou, O Peter, art next unto Me, and the next rock of 
the Church, upon whom immediately after Myself I will build My 
Church, and therefore thee only I call Peter, who before wast called 
Simon. By the same arguments the Magdeburg Centuriators (l i. 
cent. i. dcap. 4.) are refuted, and the Genevan ministers who in their 
Bibles expound thus — “ upon this rock, that is, upon this confession 
or faith — viz. : that I am the Son of God." For nowhere previously 
has this confession been called a rock, as Peter immediately before 
was called Cephas, that is, a rock. 

You may say, some of the Fathers, by the rock, understand the 
faith which Peter confessed and set forth. So & Chrysostom, S. 
Hilary (/. 6 de THnit.), S. Cyril (L 4 de Trinit.), S. Ambrose (/. 6 
in Luc. c. 9). I answer, these Fathers do not mean the faith ab- 
stractedly, but the faith as it was in Peter, and consequently they 
take Peter himselt to be the rock of the Church, as they themselves 
afterwards fully explain. They hold that Peter, for the merit of his 
faith received the dignity of a rock in the Church. As SS. Hilary 
and Chrysostom say expressly ; for on account of that faith he had 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



THE PONTIFFS S. PETER’S SUCCESSORS. 


219 


deserved to be himself the foundation of the Church, and that his 
faith should never fail, but that he should confirm and strengthen 
others in the faith. (S. Lukexxii 32.) For the Church is fashioned 
and renewed not of faith, but of faithful men, who are as it were its 
parts (for the Church is nothing else than the company of the faith- 
ful), wherefore, likewise, in order that the head of the Church may 
be of the same nature as the body, that head must be a faithful man 
—that is to say, Peter and the Pontiff The faith then is the reason 
of the founding, but the foundation is Peter himself. So S. Chrysos- 
tom, Cyril (/. 4 dc Thuit.) and S. Ambrose, Bellarmine (/. 1 de 
Pont \ c. 10,) where he refutes both Erasmus and Chytrseus, who 
follow Origen, who allegorizes after his custom, and understands by 
the rock all the faithful. In this way indeed the whole Church would 
be the rock, lor the whole Church consists of none other than the 
faithful; but where then would be the walls, the floors, and the 
roof of the Church ? Of what then shall these be built ? (&* also 
Gretser in defence oj Bdlarm , /. 3. c. 5.) 

Lastly, Christ bestowed this gift upon Peter as the future Pontiff 
of the Church; wherefore He gave the same gift to all the other 
Pontiffs, his successors, and that for the good of the Church, that it 
might be strengthened by them as by a rock, in the faith and religion 
of Christ Wherefore, S. Bernard (JL 2, de Consid.) saith to Pope 
Eugenius, “ Who art thou ? A great priest — the chief Pontiff Thou 
art the prince of bishops, thou art the heir of the Apostles, thou art 
Abel in primacy, Noah in government, Abraham in the patriarchate ; 
in order, thou art Melchiscdeck, in dignity Aaron, in authority Moses, 
in judgeship Samuel, in power Peter, in unction a Christ To thee 
the keys have been delivered, the sheep entrusted.’' 

And upon this rock. From hence it is plain that like as Cephas 
is derived from cepha, so is Peter from petra , indeed that he is the 
same as petra , as I have already shown. Wherefore, when Optatus 
Milevit (/. 2, against Parmen .) and others derive Cephas from the 
Greek xefa X$, that is, a head— they do it by a congruous allusion, 
not by a real etymology. By a similar allusion, S. Gregory Nazianzen 
(Oral, on the Passover) derives Phase or Pascha — which is a Hebrew 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



920 


S. MATTHEW, XVL 


word, as everybody knows (Exod. xii.), from the Greek that is, 

to suffer. For in the Passover happened the Passion of Christ, and His 
immolation as the Paschal Lamb. Moreover, Christ gave this name of 
rock, rather than other names (such as pillar, tower, anchor, founda- 
tion, &c.), because this name of rock is given in Scripture to Christ 
Himself. (Isaiah xxviii. 16; Psalm cxviii. 22; Matthew xxL 42.) 
He communicated, therefore, a share in His own name, together 
with His dignity and office. Thus S. Jerome ; and S. Gregory (On 
the Seven Penitential Psalms) says : “Christ is the rock, from which 
rock Peter received his name, and upon which He said that He 
would build.” Listen to S. Leo (Serm. 3, On the Anniversary of 
his Accession), where he introduces Christ as speaking thus to Peter : 
“ Since I am the rock, I the corner-stone, who make of both one ; 
I the foundation, besides which no one can lay any other; never- 
theless thou art a rock likewise, because thou art strengthened by 
My strength in order that what things are Mine by Mine own power, 
may be thine also through participation with Me : and upon this 
rock I will build My Church ; upon this strength He says, I will 
construct an eternal temple, &c.” 

J will build My Church. That is to say, I therefore call thee 
Peter and the rock, because as a house is built upon a rock that it 
may rest firm and immovable upon it against every blast of the 
winds, so will I build upon thee, O Peter, as upon a most solid 
rock, My Church; that resting upon thee, it may abide firm against 
all the attacks of heretics and wicked men, and that thou mayest 
keep and sustain it in the true frith and worship of God, in like 
manner as a rocky foundation sustains and holds together the entire 
house which is built upon it Thus S. Ambrose (Serm. 4) saith : 
“Peter is called the rock, because — like an immovable rock — he 
sustains the joints and the mass of the whole Christian edifice.” 

You may say all the Apostles are the foundation of the Church, 
as is plain from Eph. ii. 20, and Apoc. xxi. 20 ; so then Peter only 
is not the rock of the Church. I answer, that Peter is the rock and 
the foundation of the whole Church and of the entire body of the 
faithful, and therefore of the Apostles themselves. For the office 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


PETER HAS THE CARE OP THE WHOLE CHURCH. 


221 


of Peter — who is primate and chief— was to retain, direct, and 
strengthen the Apostles in faith, religion, and duty, and if at any 
time they should err, to correct them. Whence & Jerome (/. i, 
contra yovin.) says : “ Wherefore among twelve one is chosen, that by 
the appointment of a head, occasion of schism might be taken away. 19 
And S. Cyprian ( Tract on the Unity of the Church) says, “ the primacy 
is given to Peter that it might be shown there is one Church of 
Christ and one Chair.” 

Observe, Christ in this place promises by two metaphors, as S. 
Jerome says, that after His death and resurrection He will give to 
Peter the principality of the Church. The first metaphor is that of 
a foundation or foundation rock. For that thing, which in a build- 
ing is the rock and foundation, in a body is the head, in a state the 
ruler, in a kingdom the king, in a church the pontiff. The second 
metaphor is that of the keys : for keys are only given to kings and 
rulers. 

Observe, secondly : to build the Church upon this rock, signifies 
two things. First, that upon this reasonable stone — namely, Peter, 
as the head of all the Apostles — the care and government of the 
whole Church devolve next after Christ. Thus S. Chrysostom (Bom. 
55), S. Ambrose (Serm. 57), S. Gregory (/. 4, Epist. 32). Secondly, 
that the Church rests upon and is strengthened by Peter as a foun- 
dation, as the Vicar of Christ, so that it cannot err in matters of 
faith. Whence Peter, on account of his lofty confession of faith, 
received grace from Christ to become and to be appointed this 
foundation rock. 

And this is the meaning of SS. Hilary, Chrysostom, Cyril — and 
Nyssen, in the end of his book (Contra yudceos) — when they say 
that the Church was built by Christ upon the faith and confession 
of Peter, as I have explained above. Moreover, S. Chrysostom in 
this place lays stress upon the words I will build , and says : “They 
are similar to those words ‘God said/ in the first chapter of Genesis, 
by which words all things were created and subsist” In like manner 
he says : “ I will build , hath wrought all, even though tyrants oppose, 
soldiers fight, the people rage, custom struggles. For the word of 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



222 


& MATTHEW, XVI. 


God coming like a vehement fire, hath burnt up the thorns, hath 
cleansed the fields, hath prepared the ground, hath raised the build- 
ing on high, &c.” S. Jerome also (Epist. 57), consulting Pope 
Damasus whether we may say there are three Hypostases in the 
Holy Trinity or only one— thus addresses him : “I am speaking with 
the successor of the fisherman, and the disciple of the Cross. I, 
following none first, except Christ, am united to your Blessedness; 
that is, in communion with the See of Peter. I know tliat upon 
that rock the Church is built Whosoever eateth the Lamb outside 
of this house is profane ; if any man be not in the ark of Noah, he 
shall perish in the swelling of the deluge.’ 9 

And the gates of hell shall not prevail against it L Namely, against 
the Church, because it has been founded upon Peter and his suc- 
cessors, as upon a most solid rock. 

The gates of hell, ix^ the infernal city, meaning all hell, with its 
entire army of demons, and with the whole power of Lucifer its 
king. For hell and the city of God, ie., the Church, are here put in 
opposition. When S. Augustine wrote his work de Cvvitate Dei y in 
the beginning of which he speaks of the two opposite cities; 
the one of God which is the Church ; the other of the devil, ue. y 
of demons and wicked men : he takes the gates of hell to mean 
heresies, and heresiarchs ; for they fight against the faith of Peter 
and the Church, and they proceed from hell and are stiired up by 
the devil So S. Epiphanius (in Aneoratu), not far from the begin- 
ning. There are here the two figures of speech — synecdoche and 
metonymy ; for by the gates he means the whole city, both because 
the gate is the entrance into a city, and because the chief defences 
and strength of a city are wont to be at the gates, because if they 
and the adjoining walls are safe, the city is safe, if they are taken, 
the city is taken. 

Shall not prevail. Heb. lo fuchelu la , i.e., shall not be able to stand 
against //—namely, the Church. So S. Hilary and Maldonatus. 
More simply, shall not prevail \ i.e. 9 shall not conquer or overcome, or 
pull down the Church. For this is the meaning of the original 
Greek. We have here the figure of speech, miosis : for little is said 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



THE POPE SPECIALLY GUIDED. 


223 


but much is meant ; not only that the Church shall not be conquered, 
but that she shall conquer and subdue under her all heretics, tyrants, 
and every other enemy, as she overcame Arians, Nestorians, Pelagians, 
Nero, Dedus, Diocletian, &c. Therefore by this word Christ first 
animates his Church that she should not be faint-hearted when she 
sees herself attacked by all the power of Satan and wicked men. In 
the second place, He as it were sounds a trumpet for her, that she 
may always watch with her armour on against so many enemies, who 
attack her with extreme hatred. Thirdly, He promises to her, as 
well as to her head, Peter, t.e., the Pontiff— victory and triumph over 
them alL Again, Christ and the Holy Ghost assist with special 
guidance her head, the Roman Pontiff, that he should not err in 
matters of faith, but that he may be firm as an adamant, says S. 
Chrysostom, and that he may rightly administer and rule the Church, 
and guide it in the path of safety, as Noah also directed the ark that 
it should not be overwhelmed in the deluge. Wherefore S. Chry- 
sostom (Horn, de Verb . Isaiah) says : u It were more easy for the sun 
to be extinguished than for the Church to fail ; ” and again, “ what 
can be more powerful than the Church of God : the barbarians 
destroy fortifications, but not even the devils overcome the Church. 
When it is attacked openly, it conquers ; when it is attacked by 
treachery, it overcomes.” S. Augustine on the Psalms against the 
Donatists , says : “ Reckon up the Bishops even from the very Ponti- 
ficate of Peter. That is the very rock which the proud gates of hell 
conquer not” This has been made especially plain in the conversion 
of all nations, specially of Rome and the Romans. For Rome being 
the head, both of the world and of idolatry, where the idols of all 
nations were worshipped, has been converted from them by S. Peter 
and his successors, and has bowed down her proud head to the cross 
of Christ, which thing is of all miracles the greatest. 

And I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of Heaven. Thee — who 
art one person — namely, Bar-jona, or the son of Jona, as is plain 
from everything which precedes and follows. Not therefore in this 
place were the keys of Heaven promised to Peter in the person of 
the Church, or primarily to the Church herselt, as the heretics take 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



224 


& MATTHEW, XVL 


it, but to Peter himself as the head of the Church ; and through him 
to the Church and her ministers, in like manner as to the same Peter 
they were specially given and consigned by Christ after His resur- 
rection, when He said : “ Feed My sheep” Thus the Greek and 
Latin Fathers explain, passim, whose words Bellarmine recites (/. i de 
Pontiffs c. 12), where in like manner he proves at length that this is 
the meaning of S. Augustine, when he says that Peter bore the figure 
of the Church, because indeed Peter was a representative of the 
Church as a king of a kingdom : for so indeed S. Augustine explains 
himself (Tract, ult. upon S. John ), where he says : “ Of this Church 
the Apostle Peter, on account of the primacy of his Apostleship, was 
a kind of general representative.” And on Psalm 109, “Of which 
Church he is acknowledged to be the representative, on account ot 
the primacy which was his among the disciples.” Wherefore for the 
good of the Church Peter, as her head, received the keys from 
Christ ; from which it is also plain that Christ promised the keys to 
Peter as a future Pontiff, and consequently promised the same keys 
to the other Roman Pontiffs, successors of Peter. For Christ in tliis 
place had regard to a most necessary matter, and of the highest 
moment to His ever-abiding Church — that is to say, to its perpetual 
head ; and He ordained the best and most abiding constitution for 
her, namely, the monarchical, that the one Church of Christ should 
be ruled by the one Roman Pontiff, as S. Cyprian teaches on the 
Unity of the Church ; S. Jerome (/. 1, contra. Jovin.), and others, 
passim. Our Gretzer, and after him Adam Contsen, ably refute the 
cavils of Calvin and his followers about this passage. The keys — you 
will ask what the keys here signify. Calvin answers (/. 4, Inst. c. 6, 
sec. 3), that they signify both the power to preach the Gospel, as well 
is the forgiveness of sins to him who believes the Gospel which 
promises forgiveness. But this is a jejune and worthless explanation. 
For by keys doors are opened, not the mouths of preachers. Whence 
keys specially belong to kings and rulers ; not to doctors, and teachers, 
and preachers ; wherefore the keys here signify properly the right to 
rule ; whereunto pertains not only power to preach the Gospel, but 
also to absolve sins, to admonish, to ordain priests, to interpret Hoiy 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



Peter’s authority supreme *aj 

Scripture, to excommunicate, and to do all other things which per- 
tain to the good government of the Church. 

I say therefore, by the keys is here signified the chief power, both 
of order and jurisdiction, over the whole Church, promised and 
delivered in this place by Christ to Peter. For with such an object 
in view the keys of the cities are delivered to kings and princes. 
And Christ thus explains the keys in what follows, when He says : 
Whatsoever thou shait bind on earth shall be bound in heaven , &c. 
For he who hath the keys of a house, or of a city is its lord, to open 
or shut it at his pleasure : to admit into it, and to shut out of it whom 
he will. There is an allusion to Is. c. xxii, where God promising the 
principality of the synagogue to Eliakim, the Pontiff of the Old 
Testament, says : “ And I will lay upon his shoulder the key of the 
house of David, so he shall open, and none shall shut ; and he shall 
shut and none shall open.” Moreover, Eliakim was a type of Christ 
as a priest, of whom it is said (Rev. xxl), “ I saw the holy city, new 
Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride 
adorned for her husband.” The sense then is this— * 1 , Christ, will 
give to thee, Peter, as a Pontiff, and consequently to all the other 
Popes who come after thee, the keys of the kingdom of heaven , by 
which I mean supreme authority to rule the universal Church dis- 
persed throughout the whole world, that by the keys, i.e. 9 by thy power 
in opening or shutting the Church to men, thou mayest open or shut 
heaven to them. Where observe Christ said not, I will give to thee 
the keys of the kingdom of earth, lest an earthly and temporal power 
should be thought to be meant, but of the kingdom of heaven, that this 
power might be properly and directly exercised in spiritual things, 
which are those that pertain, to the kingdom of heaven ; but that it 
should be exercised only indirectly with reference to temporal things, 
being such as are necessary, or at least very profitable to spiritual 
matters. Thus S. Chrysostom ( Horn . 55) teaches that by the 
delivery of these keys by Christ to Peter there was committed to him 
the care and government of the whole world, and that he was created 
pastor and head of the entire Church. Thus also S. Gregory (/. 4, 
ep. 32) sfys : “ It is plain to all who know the Gospel that by the 

VOL. u. Q 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


226 8. MATTHEW, XVI. 

Lord's voice the care of the whole Church has been committed to S. 
Peter, the chief of all the Apostles.” And he immediately adds the 
reason, “ for to him it is said, J will give unto thee the keys of the 
kingdom of heaven? Thus also S. Hilary on this passage, and S. Leo, 
(Serm. 2 in Anniv. Assum.)> and others, passim. Listen also to S. 
Augustine (Serm 28 de Sand.) “ Peter alone among the Apostles had 
grace to hear, Thou art Peter , and upon this rock I will build My 
Church.” Worthy indeed was he to be a foundation stone for build- 
ing up the people in the house of God ; to be a pillar to support them, 
a key for the kingdom. Hence also S. Ambrose (/. 2, ep. 13) to 
his sister Marcellina — when he records the contest which he had 
with the Arians, who had demanded that the keys of the Cathedral of 
Milan, over which he presided should be delivered to them, and that 
by the command of the Emperor Valentinian the younger, who was 
ruled by his mother Justina, an Arian — said : “ The order is given, — 
* Deliver up the Cathedral/ I answer, it is neither lawful for me to 
deliver it, nor is it fitting for thee, O Emperor, to receive it Thou 
hast no right to intrude upon the house of a private person ; dost 
thou think, that God’s house may be taken away? It is alleged, all 
things are lawful to the Emperor, for all things are his. I answer, Do 
not burden thyself, O Emperor, to think that thou hast any imperial 
right over those things which are Divine. Do not lift up thyself, but 
if thou wouldst reign long, be subject to God, for it is written, Render 
unto Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and unto God the things that 
are God’s. To the Emperor pertain palaces, but churches to the 
priesthood. To him has been committed the power over the public 
fortifications, not of sacred buildings.” Thus Hosius, bishop of 
Cordova, president of the Nicene Counsel, steadfastly replied to the 
Arian Emperor Constantius, when he made a similar demand ; that 
to him belonged the keys of the cities, but the keys of the 
church to the Pontiff* alone. “ To thee ” he says, “ God has com- 
mitted the empire, to us he has entrusted what belongs to the 
Church.” 

Tropologically , the keys denote the industry, skill and wisdom in 
ruling which ought to exist in a Pontiff ; for a key ought to be skil* 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



BINDING AND LOOSING. 


227 


fully placed, fitted to, and turned in the lock, that the door may be 
opened ; so “ the art of arts is the government of souls,” says S. 
Gregory in his Pastoral, \ 

And whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in Heaven, 
and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in Heaven. 
Whatsoever, i.e., whomsoever, but he says whatsoever, because the 
neuter gender is fuller and of more universal application than the 
masculine. For the Pontiff binds and looses not men only, but sins, 
vows, oaths, &c. There is a transition from the metaphor of the 
keys to the kindred metaphor of binding and loosing ; for to open 
and shut, to bind and loose, are akin. Whence, by it, he signifies 
the same thing — that by the keys and by the rock are meant the 
supreme authority of Peter and the Pontiffs in ruling the Church. 
The power therefore of binding is a very ample one, and is exercised 
by Peter and the Pontiff in various ways. First, by not absolving 
but retaining sins and offences, and by refusing sacramental absolu- 
tion in the sacrament of penance to such as are unworthy, and with- 
out the proper dispositions, so likewise by refusing the Eucharist 
and other sacraments. (S. John xx. 23.) Second, by enjoining 
penance to the lapsed. Third, by binding such as are guilty with 
excommunication and other ecclesiastical censures. Fourth, by 
enjoining laws and precepts with respect to feasts, fasts, tithes, &c., 
upon the faithful. Fifth, by binding Christians with definitions of 
faith, when the Pontiff, ex cathedra, defines and declares what is to 
be believed, what is to be rejected, as erroneous and heretical, what 
monastic orders are good, what are not — what estate of life is honour- 
able and lawful — what is not, &c. Hence, from the contraries, it is 
plain what is meant by loosing ; namely, to absolve and to release 
from the aforesaid obligations. Christ therefore here explains the 
power of the keys through the metaphor, not of opening and shutting, 
which are the two proper offices of keys, but by one more powerful, 
that is of chains, by binding men with them, or loosing those that are 
bound ; which power S. Peter and the Roman Pontiffs, his successors, 
have received from Christ over all men whatsoever, thoughout the 
whole world. The Pontiffs, nevertheless, give a share of this power, 

Q • 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


228 


S. MATTHEW, XVI. 


as they think good, to bishops and pastors and other ministers of 
the Church subordinate to them; and therefore Christ said to the 
other Apostles also (Matthew xviii. 18) : Whatsoever ye shall bind on 
earth, shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, 
shall be loosed in Heaven ; by which words the same power is given 
to the Apostles by Christ over the whole world which is here given 
to Peter; but the same power is here given in an especial manner 
to Peter only, to signify that he has the primacy and the principality 
in this power, so as to be able by it to be direct, constrain, correct 
the other Apostles, as it were subordinate to him, and committed to 
his care, and hence that he might, if indeed it were needful, deprive 
them of it Whence the Synod of Alexandria, over which S. Atha- 
nasius presided, agreeable to the council of Nice, writes to Pope 
Felix that the power of binding and loosing has been, by a special 
privilege granted, above others, to the Roman See by the Lord Himself 
Upon earth : (Following upon these words i Lapide enters upon a 
discussion as to how far, and in what manner the jurisdiction of the 
Supreme Pontiff extends over souls in hell or puigatoiy. He gives 
various opinions of theologians, not apparently of the veiy highest 
authority, which it would be wearisome to translate, and then con- 
cludes the discussion, summing up as follows : Translator.) In fine 
it is more agreeable to truth that the Pope possesses judicial power 
to bind and loose those only who are living upon the earth, but not 
the dead. When therefore he gives indulgences applicable to the 
departed, it is not in the way of judicial absolution, because the dead 
are no longer under his jurisdiction, but by way of suffrages, as he 
is accustomed fully to express in his Bulls — namely, by expending for 
the dead so much of the treasure of the Church, of which he is the 
steward, as the departed owe of penalties to God. For this treasure 
is upon earth, and is at the disposal of the Pontiff This is the 
opinion of S. Thomas, Bonaventura, Alensis, Gabriel, Major, 
Richardus, Cajetan, D. Soto, Navarre, and Bellarmine (Tract, de 
InduL), whom Suarez cites and follows (< dePcenit : Disp. 53, s. 2. n. et 
seq.), who also adds, that properly and directly the Pontiff can neither 
excommunicate the dead, nor absolve them from excommunication. 


Digitized by 


Google 



THE POPE'S POWER OVER THE DEAD. 92 $ 

but only indirectly, in so far as he may directly forbid, or permit the 
living to pray for one who is dead, and by so doing may deprive the 
dead indirectly of the suffrages of the Church, as though they had 
been excommunicated — or, on the other hand, may give them a share 
in those suffrages, in the same manner as if he absolved them from 
excommunication. When, therefore, Christ saith here to Peter What- 
soever thou shalt loose , <&*«,., by loosing is to be understood not only 
judicial absolution, but every dispensation, favour and grace as well, 
which, by the efficacy of that power, has been conferred upon him by 
Christ, and of this kind is that dispensing of the treasure of the 
Church which, by way of suffrages, the Pontiff expends and applies 
for the benefit of the faithful departed. This then is the meaning of 
the words upon earth . 

Then He commanded . • . Jesus the Christ. Some Greek MSS. 
and the Syriac omit the word Jesus . Then the sentence flows more 
clearly ; for all men knew that He was called Jesus, but they did not 
know that He was Messiah, or Christ, the true Son of God. Christ 
did not wish the Apostles to preach this doctrine to others, for two 
reasons; first, because they themselves were not as yet sufficiently 
instructed and confirmed in it. Secondly, because Christ was about 
to be put to death by the Jews. Wherefore the Jews would have 
been scandalised if the Apostles had preached that He was Messiah 
and God, and would have said to them, Away with your Christ to 
destruction, Who would make us Deicides— even as the Jews say to 
Christians now; wherefore, had they once cast away faith in Christ, 
they would not have hearkened to it any more, even though it had 
been attested afterwards by miracles. Thus they were to wait for 
the death, the glory, and the resurrection of Christ ; that then they 
might proclaim Him to be Messiah and the Son of God, and con- 
firm this doctrine by miracles, and persuade the people, as they did 
at Pentecost (Acts ii), according to the words: "Wherefore God 
also hath highly exalted Him, and given Him a name which is above 
every name ; that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of 
things in Heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth." 
(Phil ii 9, io.) Thus S. Jerome: "Preach Me when I shall have 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



230 


ft MATTHEW, XVI. 


suffered those things, since it is not expedient that Christ should be 
publicly proclaimed, and His majesty made commonly known among 
the people, when they are about shortly to behold Him scourged 
and crucified.** 

From that time forth began Jesus , &c. Gr. avo rSrt, £&, from this 
time in which He had made known to them His Divinity, He began 
to teach them concerning His Passion and Death. For there are 
two chief points of faith — namely, Christ’s Divinity, and His Humanity, 
together with His Cross and Passion, by which He redeemed the 
world. There was also another reason — lest when the Apostles 
beheld Christ put to death, they should doubt concerning His 
Divinity; and He would show them that the two things were not 
inconsistent For in this way only could He make perfect satisfac- 
tion to the justice of God for the sins of Adam and his posterity. 
Lastly, He wished to instruct men how to imitate Him and bear 
His cross. 

And Peter took Him and began to rebuke Him. Took Him — that is 
to say, apart — as though more familiarly and secretly he would chide 
Him out of vehement love, which before the others he did not dare 
to do. So S. Chrysostom, and Euthymius ; and S. Jerome, who com 
ments thus: “Peter did not wish that his confession should be 
brought to nought, as he had said, ‘Thou art the Christ, the Son of 
the living God,’ for he did not think that it was possible that the 
Son of God should be put to death; and so he takes Him into 
connexion with himself, or leads Him apart that he might not 
appear to reprove his teacher in the presence of his fellow-disciples, 
and began to rebuke Him with loving affection, and to say to Him 
with desire, ‘ Be it far from Thee, O Lord ;* or — as it is better — in 
the Greek , 1 Be propitious to Thyself, O Lord.’ ” It will not be, 
says S. Thomas, that this should have, as it were, a necessary pro- 
pitiation. And Christ indeed accepted the affection, but reproved 
the ignorance. Be it far from Thee, Lord; this shall not be unto 
Thee. So shameful a death shall not befal Thee; for who can 
endure that the Son of God should be crucified and put to death? 
The Greek is iXcwc <roi, i.e., mayest thou be, or may God be propitious 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



PETER CALLED SATAN. 


231 

to the t. So the LXX usually translates the Hebrew, hali-la-lach, *.&, 
let there be prohibition to Thee — as formerly people were wont to 
say 44 the gods forbid ” — 44 the gods send better things." The Syriac 
is spare Thyself. Peter speaks out of human prudence and affection, 
not by Divine inspiration as when he said a little before, 44 Thou 
art Christ the Son of the Living God,*’ for here being left to himself 
he fails, and therefore he is reproved by Christ. 

But He turned and said unto Peter , Get thee behind Me, Satan — 
thou art an offence unto Me (Syriac, thou art a stumbling-block unto 
Me), for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those 
that be of men . S. Hilary refers the Get thee behind Me to Peter, 
but the words Satan , thou art an offence unto Me he refers not to 
Peter, but to the devil, who had suggested to Peter to say, be it fat 
from Thee, O Lord. S. Hilary writes thus : 44 For the Lord, knowing 
the suggestion of the Satanic craft, saith to Peter, 4 Go thou back- 
ward after Me’ — ix., that he should follow the example of His 
Passion. But He adds against him by whom this speech had been 
suggested, Thou art an offence unto Me, Satan : for wc must not 
think that the name of Satan and the offence of the stumbling-block 
are to be applied to Peter after such great words of blessedness and 
power had been applied to him." But all other writers join Satan 
with Get thee behind Me, and consider that the whole was spoken 
to Peter. Christ therefore saith unto Peter, Get thee behind Me — i.e.. 
leave Me, depart hence, get out of My sight ; for in this matter thou 
art not a friend unto Me, but Satan — that is, an adversary (for this 
is the meaning of the Hebrew 44 Satan," and so the Vulgate has it ; 
2 Sam. xix. 22, and 1 Kings v. 4)— and a scandal, that is, a stumbling- 
block and hindrance to Me ; for thou wouldst hinder My Passion, 
and consequently the redemption and salvation of man, which by 
My Passion I am about to merit and obtain. So S. Chrysostom, 
Euthymius, and S. Jerome, who says: 44 It is My own and My 
Father’s good pleasure that I should die for the salvation of man , 
thou considerest only thine own will, and wouldst not that the grain 
of wheat should fall into the earth so as to oring forth much fruit." 
44 And therefore,” says S. Thomas, “because thou art contrary t q 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



* 3 * 


8. MATTHEW, XVT. 


My will thou oughtest to be called an adversary, for Satan is inter- 
preted adversary , or contrary ; not, however — as many think — that 
Satan and Feter are condemned by the same sentence, for to Peter 
it is said, Get thee behina Me, Satan, i.e., thou who art contrary to 
My will, follow thou Me. But to Satan it is said, Get thee hence, 
Satan ; and it is not said to him 4 behind me, 9 that it may be under- 
stood Go away into everlasting fire." Calvin and his followers 
object that Christ here calls Peter Satan; therefore He a little pre- 
viously did not call him the rock, nor appoint him the head of the 
Church. S. Jerome answers that Peter was called Satan (that is, 
an adversary) only for the particular time in which he withstood 
Christ, who was willing to suffer and be crucified, but that he was 
appointed a rock, not for the time then present, but for the future; 
namely, that after Christ’s death and resurrection he should become 
the rock and head of the Church. Secondly, S. Augustine (Serm. 
13, de Verb. Dom. secundum Matth.) and Theophylact reply, that 
Peter is called blessed, and constituted the rock of the Church, inas- 
much as being enlightened by the revelation of God, he had con- 
fessed Christ the Son of the Living God, and therefore had been by 
Him appointed the rock of the Church ; but that he is here called 
Satan so far as he, departing from God and God’s decree (of which 
he was ignorant), followed human affection, on account of which he 
was unwilling that Christ— whom he loved so much — should die. 
Moreover, the fifth (Ecumenical Council of Constantinople, in a 
constitution of Pope Vigilius, pronounces an anathema against 
those who explain the words of Christ (Get thee behind Me, Satan) to 
have been spoken to Peter, lest the mind of Christ, being perturbed 
by his dissuasion, should avoid the Passion, so that by His Passion 
He might be profitable to Himself, and who therefore do not believe 
that His death purchased the rewards of eternal life for us.* In 

* The construction of this passage is somewhat involved, and the thought 
obscure. What appears, however, to be meant is this. First, that there were 
some early heretics who held that the primary or chief object of our Lord’s 
Passion was to procure certain rewards and advantages to Himself, rather than 
to reconcile man to God, and obtain the salvation of the human race. Secondly, 
that our Lord’s rebuke was given to Peter, on the ground that if He followed 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



ON SELF-DENIAL. 


*33 


a similar way, blessed Peter Damian (/. i, Epist. xvL to Pope Alex. 
II.) calls Cardinal Hildebrand, who afterwards became Pope 
Gregory VII., “ his holy Satan. 91 Satan, because he opposed his 
refusing the cardinalate and returning to his Camaldolese her- 
mitage; holy, because he did it with a holy purpose, namely, because 
he saw that the work of Peter was very useful to the Church. 

For thou savourest not, &c. ; Arab, thou thinkest not ; Gr. oh fpoveic, 
i.e., thou understandest not, thou dost not receive, nor approve with 
thine intellect and thine affections the things which are pleasing to 
God, but the things which human prudence, that is to say, flesh and 
blood, suggests. This was the fount and the cause of Peter’s error, 
and of all other men, that thou savourest not. For thou wouldst con- 
sider My body and My life, and wouldst provide for human consola- 
tion contrary to God’s decree, whereby He has most wisely appointed 
that I should die for the salvation of men. Thus men sin when 
they prefer the weak judgment of the flesh to the wise and lofty 
judgment of God. For, “ the animal man perceiveth not the things 
of the Spirit of God : for they are foolishness unto him, and he 
cannot understand them.” (i. Cor. ii. 14). 

Then Jesus said, &c. This medicine of self-denial and the cross 
Christ opposes to natural love, which Peter had shown to Christ 
when he would have hindered His Passion. Therefore He spake 
this not to Peter only, but to the other Apostles, yea even to the 
multitude, as Mark says (viii. 34). This is a sort of axiom of Christ’s 
school, if any one will come after Me, &c. It means, says Chrysostom, 
11 Thou, O Peter, suggestest unto Me, spare Thy life, be propitious to 
Thyself but I say to thee that not only is it hurtful to thee to keep 
Me from My Passion, but not even thyself canst be saved, unless 

Peter’s advice, and shrank from His coming Passion, He would by so doing 
deprive Himself of the benefits flowing from it. 

The anathema of the Council, which is referred to in the text, seems therefore 
to be directed against those who would consider our Lord's rebuke to Peter at 
springing from the thought that, listening to S. Peter’s advice would deprive Him* 
self of the benefits of His Passion. 

The heretical idea condemned by the Council is the very subtle one, that our 
Lord was actuated by a regard to self-interest in His voluntary submission to 
suffering and death. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



234 


S. MATTHEW, XVI. 


thou shalt suffer and renounce thy life. Christ gives three commands, 
first, let a man deny himself ; second, let him take up the cross ; third, 
let him follow Mel* 

If any man will \ & c. Christ does not compel, nor use violence, 
says S. Chrysostom, but invites the willing, and kindly allures and 
draws them. For who would not long and bum to follow Christ, the 
Son of God ? But as God bids all follow Christ, so likewise He 
bids them freely choose and embrace self-denial. Again Christ draws 
all men, when He says “ come after Me.” He means, ye will not be 
the first in the cross, in death, in martyrdom. I, your Captain, will 
go before you ; wherefore follow Me because I will precede you, not 
only by My example, but by My help, and I will make you certain 
of victory and the crown, if only ye will follow Me and earnestly 
co-operate with My grace. Thus Cato going before his soldiers 
through the sands of Lybia, said, “ Have experience of your perils 
by mine. I will command nothing except what I do myself first.” 

Let him deny himself: i.e., Let him put away from him his own 
judgment, and human affection. For this is the dearest to a man of 
all things, by which man is delighted and fed, so that he thinks it is 
man himself. For man is that which flourishes and lives in man. 
He bids therefore that eveiy one should mortify his natural affections, 
so far as they are repugnant to the will of God. 

Christ, as it were, says to Peter, Be thou willing to act in all thy 
judgments, desires, affections, and notably in the death of the cross 
as God hath appointed for thee, that thou mayest embrace that will, 
although nature and natural affection would dread it, and flee from 
it according to the words, “ Verily, verily, I say unto thee, When 
thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and waikedst whither thou 
wouldest : but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy 
hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou 
wouldest not ” (John xxL 18). Whence Origen explains let him deny 
himself to mean, Let him deny his life by undergoing death for the 
sake of faith in Me, even as I undergo the death of the cross for 
God’s sake. After a like manner let every believer deny himself />., 
his own desires, his own imaginations, his own human reasonings, his 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



SELF-DENIAL* 


*3b 

own will ; and let him conform it in all things to the will of God. 
So too with regard to his senses, so far as they desire things forbidden 
by God, let him say, I will not see, or hear, or taste those things, 
because I wish to follow the law of God, and to please God, and not 
to give satisfaction to my carnal appetites. 

S. Gregory observes, (Ham. 32 in Evang. ) Christ does not say, 
Let him deny his riches, but let him deny himself, so that a man 
should go away from himself, and become a stranger to himself, yea 
that he should leave off to be what he was and begin to be what he 
was not, and become as it were a new and another man. “ It is 
less,” he says, “ to deny what a man has; but it is far more to deny 
what he is. It sufficeth not to relinquish what is ours unless we leave 
also ourselves .” S. Gregory then asks the question, “ Whither shall 
we go out of ourselves?” And he answers, “We have become 
something different through our fall into sin from that which we 
were made. Let us leave therefore ourselves, as we have made our- 
selves by sinning : and let us remain ourselves such as we have been 
made by grace. Behold, he who was proud, if he has been converted 
to Christ, has been made humble ; he has left himself.” He shows us 
the same thing by the example of Paul, " Let us consider how Paul 
had denied himself, when he said, * I live, yet not 1 9 ; forasmuch as 
that cruel persecutor was dead and the pious preacher had begun to 
live, # Christ indeed liveth in me/ ” It is as though he said plainly, 
I indeed am dead to myself, because I live not after the flesh. 
Nevertheless I am not dead essentially, because I live in Christ 
spiritually. Therefore let the Truth say, let It say, If any man wilt 
come after me, let him deny himself; because except a man cease from 
himself, he cannot draw nigh to Him who is above himself : nor is 
he able to apprehend that which is beyond himself, if he knows not 
how to slay that which he is. 

S. Chrysostom (Horn. 56.) illustrates the same principle by a simili- 
tude. “ If thou understandest what it is to deny another, then wilt 
thou rightly perceive what it is to deny thyself. He who has denied 
another, if he see him beaten with rods, if cast into chains, he does 
not assist him, he is altogether unmoved, as one who is wholly apart 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



236 


8. MATTHEW, XVI. 


from him. Thus too He wills us by no means to spare our own 
body, that not even though it be beaten, nor burnt, not sutler any 
other thing, we should spare it” Victor of Antioch adds, “ He hath 
not said, a man must not be too self indulgent ; or that he should 
not spare his own flesh too much ; but rising to a very lofty height, 
let him deny himself, He says, or abjure himself, that is, let him have 
no commerce with himself, or with his own flesh, but let him so con- 
duct himself, as though it were not he himself who bears the cross 
but some other person.” Note this word abjure. For as in baptism 
we renounce Satan, and as it were abjure him, so ought we fully to 
deny, and as it were abjure ourselves, that is our lusts. For these 
are more the enemies oi our salvation than the devils themselves. For 
we dread the devil, but our lusts flatter and deceive us, and profess 
to be our friends. For there is greater danger from one who secretly 
lies in wait than from an open enemy. 

In the Lives of the Fathers (/. 5, libello 1, de profedu patrum , num. 
7) the Abbot John gives the following proofs of self-denial and a 
holy life : “Be patient under injuries, and not soon angry : be a 
peacemaker, and not rendering evil for evil : not looking at the faults 
of others, nor exalting thyself ; but be subject with humility unto 
every one : renouncing all fleshly pleasures, and the things which are 
after the flesh, in humility of spirit, in fasting, in patience, in hunger 
and thirst, in cold and nakedness, and in labours, shutting thyself 
up in a sepulchre, as though thou wast already dead, that death may 
every day seem to be very nigh unto thee.” S. Agidius, a com- 
panion of S. Francis, a very holy man, and enlightened by God, was 
wont to give these paradoxes of self-denial which follow : 

“If thou wilt see clearly, pluck out thine eyes, and become blind. 

“ If thou wilt hear well, be thou deaf. 

“ If thou wouldst speak well, become dumb. 

'* If thou wouldst walk well, cut off thy feet. 

“ If thou wouldst work well, cut off thine hands. 

“ If thou wouldst love well, hate thyself. 

“ If thou wouldst live well, make thyself die. 

“ If thou wouldst gain, learn to lose. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



MAXIMS OP PERFECTION* 


*37 

M If thou wouldst be rich, become poor* 

“ If thou wouldst live in pleasure, afflict thyself. 

“ If thou wouldst be secure, have perpetual fear. 

“ If thou wouldst be exalted, humble thyself. 

“ If thou wouldst be honoured, despise thyself, and honour those 
who despise thee. 

“ If thou wouldst have what is good, bear evil 

“ If thou wouldst be at rest, work* 

M If thou wouldst be blessed, desire to be evil spoken of. 

“ Oh how great is this wisdom, to know how to do these things ! 
and because they are great, they are not given unto all men.” 

“The same Agidius gives the following as the way of salvation, and 
perfection through self denial : 

“ If thou wilt be saved, do not ask of any human creature the reason 
wherefore anything befalls thee. 

“ If thou wilt be saved, make it thy business to rise superior to every 
consolation and honour which a creature can give thee. 

“ Woe to those who desire to be honoured for their wickedness. 

“ If any one contendeth with thee and thou wishest to overcome, 
be overcome ; for when thou thinkest thou hast won, thou has lost 

“ If thou lovest, thou shalt be loved. 

“ If thou fearest, thou shalt be feared. 

“ If thou doest service, service shall be done unto thee. 

“ If thou actest well to others, others shall behave well towards 
thee. 

“ Blessed is he who loves, and seeks not to be loved again. 

“ Blessed is he who serves, and seeketh not to be served. And 
forasmuch as these things are great, fools cannot attain unto 
them.” 

There are three things which ought more especially to cleave to 
thy mind. The first is, to bear willingly all tribulations. The 
second, to be more and more humble on account of everything 
which thou doest, or receivest The third, faithfully to love those 
good things which cannot be seen with bodily eyes. 

Let him take up his cross. That as I have borne Mine, he may 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 





S. MATTHEW, XVL 


238 

follow with alacrity Me, Christ, as it were the first cross bearer, and the 
Standard Bearer and Captain of the cross bearers — I who bore My 
cross, on which I was to be crucified, on My shoulders to Mount Cal- 
vary. Luke adds the word daily, to signify that every day, andsome- 
times every hour, some trouble will come to every" one, which he ought 
to bear bravely and patiently ; and that throughout his whole life ; and 
thus must every one live upon the cross, and die upon the cross with 
Christ “ He takes up his cross” says S. Jerome, “who is cruci- 
fied to the world, to whom also the world is crucified, who follows a 
crucified Lord.” This cross is, 1. persecution and martyrdom; 
2. any affliction or tribulation sent by God ; 3. temptation of the 
devil, permitted by God for our probation and humiliation, and to 
increase our reward; 4. self denial and the mortification of our 
lusts. 

His own cross , / every one has his peculiar cross ; one has it from 
wife, or children, or relations ; another from character ; a third from 
rivals ; a fourth from misfortunes ; a fifth from poverty ; a sixth from 
exile, bonds, and so on. 

2. His own cross , commensurate with his strength. For God 

does not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able, says S. 
Paul. He gives to every one a cross as a sort of medicine suitable 
to the vice from which he suffers. Thus to him who is inclined to 
pride, God gives some despite, or temptation of the flesh, such as 
He permitted to come upon S. Paul. The cross He gives to the 
covetous is loss of goods. To the learned, a fall into some mistake, 
or bad repute, lest he should be puffed up, and think too highly of 
himself 

3. His own cross , i.e. f decreed by God from eternity for his good. 
When therefore thou feelest the cross, think upon God, and say, “ O 
Lord, I willingly accept this cross from thy Fatherly hand, for this is 
the cross which has been appointed to me from eternity, and decreed 
by Thee for the destruction of my faults ; wherefore I render unto 
Thee boundless thanks. For I know and believe that by it Thou 
wouldst make me like unto thy well beloved Son, here in patience, 
and hereafter in glory. 4 For, whom He did foreknow, He also 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



ON LOSING AND SAVING THE SOUL. 


*39 


did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, that 
He might be the first-born among many brethren.* ” (Rom. viii. 
29.) 

4. As S. Gregory says {Hot n. 32. in Evang .), “ The cross is taken 
up in two ways, when either by abstinence the body is affected, or by 
compassion for our neighbour the mind is afflicted. Let us consider 
how in both ways Paul bore his cross. For he said, “ I chastise my 
body and reduce it to servitude, lest perchance preaching to others, 
I myself should be made reprobate.” ( Vulg .) Next let us hear 
his mind’s cross through compassion for his neighbour. For he said, 
" Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is offended, and I bum 
not?” Behold how the perfect preacher carried the cross in his 
body, to give an example of abstinence. And forasmuch as He 
took upon Himself the failings of other men’s infirmity, He carried 
the cross in His heart” 

For he that will save his life, &c. Greek and Vulgate, his soul. 
Forasmuch as the cross is bitter and gives pain, M Christ,” says S. 
Chrysostom, “ here animates believers to take it up, by the great 
reward and the crown of glory which it brings. It is as though one 
should say to a husbandman : 1 If thou shouldst keep thy com, thou 
losest it ; if thou sowest it, thou renewest it. For who does not know 
that the com, which decays in the dust, springs up from the same 
dust in a renewed form ?•” Origen explains this verse in two ways. 
1. Thus : If any man (being a lover of life present) spares his soul 
through fear of death, and thinking that his soul will perish by that 
death, he shall lose it, withdrawing it from life eternal. But if any 
one (despising life present) shall contend for the truth even until 
death, he shall lose indeed his soul so far as pertains to this life ; 
but since he shall lose it for Christ’s sake, he shall make it safe for 
the life eternal. The other explanation is as follows : If any one 
understands what true safety is, and wishes to gain it for the salvation 
of his soul, he, by denying himself, loses his soul (so far as carnal 
pleasures are concerned) for Christ’s sake ; and losing his soul in 
this way, he saves it through works of piety. Thus far Origen. The 
former explanation seems to be the more correct, and may be ampli- 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


240 


S. MATTHEW, XVL 


fied thus : He who in this life, fleeing from the cross and self-denial, 
wishes to preserve his soul — that is, his life — and therefore denies 
Me and My faith in persecution; or wishes to save his soul — that is, 
the desires of his soul — he shall lose his soul in the life to come, in 
hell But he who shall lose his soul in this life for Christ’s sake — 
either by dying for Him in persecution, or by denying his lusts for 
His sake — he shall find his soul, which he lost in this life, in the 
life to come. He shall find it in eternal glory, in the bosom of 
Christ, Who shall raise and glorify the soul which was exposed to 
death for His sake. The antithesis between lose and save requires 
this meaning. 

For what does it profit , &c. Lose — Greek, (ifmudjj, i.e., make loss , 
be fined. The meaning is, What assistance shall it be to thee — for 
this is the meaning of the Greek ctycXef — to have gained all the 
riches, honours, and pleasures of the whole world, if on account of 
them you destroy yourself, and be fined as to your soul with the 
eternal torments of hell? According to the words, “ If you lose all 
things, remember to save your soul” For wealth and pleasure^ if 
you lose, you may recover 1 but the soul once lost, is lost for ever. 
O foolish children of Adam, why do ye so love these fleeting things, 
that for them ye lose your souls, and deliver them to everlasting 
burnings? O insensate, who for a drop of pleasure purchase eternal 
pains. 

Or what shall a man, &a, exchange; Greek, 6ir6AAayfta, i.e., com- 
pensation , exchange , price, ransom. For thy soul is above all pricey 
all compensation; because it has been purchased and redeemed by 
the precious Blood of Christ, the Lord our God. Wherefore the 
whole world is an insufficient price for the soul of one man. For if 
once thou shalt lose it, by no price canst thou redeem it, nor be able 
to buy back thy soul with any other soul, because thou hast but one. 
Here, indeed, the soul is able to redeem her falls by repentance, by 
tears, and by good works : but in the Day of Judgment there will be 
no longer place for repentance and redemption. Behold, therefore, 
the deceit of Satan and the folly of man. Satan buys the soul of a 
sinner from him at the cheapest rate, for the brief pleasure of glut* 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


THE KINGDOM OF CHRIST. »4I 

tony, of luxury, and so on. “ He offers an apple, and deprives him 
of Paradise,” says S. Bernard. 

The San of Man, &c, — according to his works, ie., according to 
what he hath wrought^ not according to what he hath known, under- 
stood, believed. 

Shall come in the glory of His Father. This is the incentive with 
which Christ stirs up all to heroic acts of self-denial, of the cross, 
and of virtue. Hear what S. Jerome says (Efist. i, ad Heliodorum ) : 
Thus he invites him to a solitary life, and to take up his cross — 
“ Dost thou fear poverty? Christ calls the poor blessed. Art thou 
terrified at labour ? But no athlete is crowned without sweat Dost 
thou think about food? But faith is not afraid of famine. Dost 
thou fear to wear out thy limbs upon the bare ground? But the 
Lord lieth with thee. Does the infinite vastness of the desert 
affright thee? But do thou walk in Paradise in thy mind. That 
day will come, it will surely come, in which this corruptible and this 
mortal shall put on incorruption and immortality. Blessed is the 
servant whom the Lord shall find watching. Then when the earth 
with its inhabitants shall tremble at the sound of the trumpet, thou 
shalt rejoice. Then shall the most mighty kings tremble in their 
nakedness. Plato, with his disciples, shall be found a fool The 
arguments of Aristotle shall not profit But then shalt thou, a 
rustic and poor, exult Thou shalt laugh, and say, Behold my 
crucified God, behold the Judge, who, wrapped in swathing-bands, 
cried in the manger.” Thus S. Jerome, pathetically but truly. 

Verily Isay unto you, &c., in His kingdom . Syriac, into His king- 
dom. Christ promised that a reward in the heavenly kingdom 
should be given for good works of self-denial and the cross. Now, 
lest any one should find fault that it was to be put off for many ages, 
He shows that it was in reality near ; He shows that very kingdom 
in the transfiguration, after a few days, to some yet alive. 

Shall not taste of death, i.e., shall not die. It is a metaphor taken 
from the deadly cup which was given to persons condemned to die. 

In His Kingdom. You will ask what was this kingdom of Christ ; 
and when some of the Apostles standing there beheld it? S. Gregory 
VOL. IL R 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


8. MATTHEW, XVL 


* 4 * 

answers {Ham. 32, in Evang.\ and Bede, that this kingdom of Christ 
was the Church, and its diffusion throughout all nations, which verily 
the Apostles beheld, yea, brought about Christ says this, says S. 
Gregory, that from the spread of the Church’s kingdom, which they 
were about to behold, they might learn how great would be their 
future glory in the heavenly kingdom, which in this life 
is invisible. For God, by the visible things, which He sets forth, 
confirms the hope of the invisible promises. And 2. Some think 
that it was to take place at the resurrection, and in the day of judg- 
ment, of which Christ spake in the preceding verse. But I say it 
took place in the Transfiguration of Christ. For in it they beheld 
Christ’s glorious kingdom as in a glass. Three of the Apostles, 
namely, Peter, James, and John, had a foretaste of this kingdom. 
This view is plain from what follows. All the three Evangelists who 
relate the Transfiguration, place it immediately after this promise, as 
though it were the fulfilment of it Thus SS. Hilary, Chrysostom, 
Jerome, Ambrose, Theophylact, and others, passim . Whence S. Leo 
says (de Transfig.). In the kingdom , that is in royal splendour. For 
in His Transfiguration Christ gave to His Apostles a specimen of 
the glory, the joy and the happiness which the Saints shall obtain 
in the Heavenly Kingdom, that He might thereby animate them to 
Evangelical labours and sorrows, and that they might animate others 
to the same. After the same manners. Jerome animates Eustochium. 
“ Go forth,” he saith, “ for a little space from thy prison, and picture 
to thine eyes the reward of thy present labours, which eye hath not 
seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of man. 
What sort of day will that be when Mary the mother of the Lord 
shall meet thee with choirs of virgins ? When after Pharaoh with 
his host has been drowned in the Red Sea, she shall sing the antiphon 
to the responsive choirs, as she bears the timbrel. Let us sing to 
the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously ; the horse and his rider 
hath He thrown into the sea. Then shall Theda joyfully fly to 
embrace thee. Then too the Spouse Himself shall meet thee, and 
shall say, Arise and come, My kinswoman, and My fair one, for lo 
the winter is passed, the rain is over. Then the angels shall wonder 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


S. JEROME ANIMATES EUSTOCHTUM. 


*43 


and say, who is this that looketh forth as the morning, beautiful as 
the moon, chosen as the sun ? Then the little ones, lifting up the 
palms of victoiy, shall sing with concordant voice, * Hosanna in the 
Highest ! Blessed is he that cometh in the uame of the Lord. 
Hosanna in the Highest ! 9 Then the hundred and forty and four 
thousand before the Throne, and before the Elders shall hold their 
harps, and shall chant the new song." 


8 3 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



*44 


CHAPTER XVIL 

I. Ihe transfiguration of Christ, 14 He healeth the lunatich , 22 fbreteileth his 
own passion , 24 and payeth tribute . 

A ND after six days Jesus taketh Peter, James, and John his brother, and bring- 
eth them up into an high mountain apart 
2 And was transfigured before them : and his face did shine as the sun, and his 
raiment was white as the light 

3 And, behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking with 
him. 

4 Then answered Peter, and said unto Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here : 
if thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles ; one for thee and one for Moses, 
and one for Elias. 

5 While he yet spake, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them : and behold 
a voice out of the cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well 
pleased ; hear ye him. 

6 And when the disciples heard it 9 they fell on their face, and were sore 
afraid. 

7 And Jesus came and touched them, and said. Arise, and be not afraid. 

8 And when they had lifted up their eyes, they saw no man save Jesus 
only. 

9 And as they came down from the mountain, Jesus charged them, saying, 
Tell the vision to no man, until the Son of man be risen again from the dead. 

10 And his disciples asked him, saying, Why then say the scribes that Elias 
must first come? 

11 And Jesus answered and said unto them, Elias truly shall first come, and 
restore all tilings. 

12 But I say unto you, That Elias is come already, and they knew him not, but 
have done unto him whatsoever they listed. Likewise shall also the Son of man 
suffer of them. 

13 Then the disciples understood that he spake unto them of John the Baptist 
14 U And when they were come to the multitude, there came to him a certain 
man, kneeling down to him, and saying, 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



*45 


15 Lord, have mercy on my son : for he is lunatick, and sore vexed : for oft* 
times he frlleth into the fire, and oft into the water. 

16 And I brought him to thy disciples, and they could not cure him. 

17 Then Jesus answered and said, O faithless and perverse generation, how long 
shall I be with you ? how long shall I suffer you ? bring him hither to me. 

18 And Jesus rebuked the devil ; and he departed out of him : and the child 
was cured from that very hour. 

19 Then came the disciples to Jesus, apart, and said. Why could not we cast 
him out 

20 And Jesus said unto them, Because of your unbelief : for verily I say unto 
you. If ye have frith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this mountain. 
Remove hence to yonder place ; and it shall remove ; and nothing shall be impos- 
sible unto you. 

21 Howbeit this kind goeth not out but by prayer and fasting. 

22 IF And while they abode in Galilee, Jesus said unto them. The Son of man 
shall be betrayed into the hands of men : 

23 And they shall kill him, and the third day he shall be raised again. And 
they were exceeding sorry. 

24 IF And when they were come to Capernaum, they that received tribute money 
came to Peter, and said, Doth not your master pay tribute? 

25 He saith. Yes. And when he was come into the house, Jesus prevented 
him, saying, What thinkest thou, Simon? of whom do the kings of the earth take 
custom or tribute ? of their own children, or of strangers ? 

26 Peter saith unto him, Of strangers. Jesus saith unto him, Then are the 
children free. 

27 Notwithstanding, lest we should offend them, go thou to the sea, and cast an 
hook, and take up the fish that first cometh up ; and when thou hast opened his 
mouth, thou shalt find a piece of money ; that take and give unto them for me 
and thee. 

And after six days , &c. There seems to be here a discrepancy 
with Luke ix. 28, who says, it came to pass about an eight days after 
these things . S. Jerome answers, “ The solution is simple, because 
in S. Matthew the intervening days are given ; in S. Luke there is an 
addition of the brst and the last day.” Matthew then and Mark 
do not count the first day, in which Christ spoke what we have heard, 
and gave the promise of His Transfiguration ; nor yet the last and 
eighth, because Christ was transfigured on the morning of it Luke 
indeed only counts the entire days, and therefore says, about. Christ 
put off His promised Transfiguration for six days that, as S. Chrysos- 
tom says, the rest of the disciples might not feel any movement of envy. 
The second reason for delay was because Christ wished to be transfigured 
on Mount Tabor, which is distant from Caesarea Philippi twenty 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



246 


S. MATTHEW, XVII. 


leagues. Christ therefore journeying slowly according to His custom, 
occupied six days in preaching in the villages and country inter- 
vening. Rahanus gives a third and mystical reason — that it might 
be signified that the resurrection, of which the Transfiguration was 
a type, should take place after the six ages of the world. Origen 
gives a fourth reason, that it might be signified, that he alone, who 
transcends all worldly things (for the world was made in six days) is 
able to ascend above the mount on high and to behold the Word 
of God. 

Peter, James , and John : “ He took up these three," says S. 
Chrysostom “because they were greater than the rest" Christ 
selected these three Apostles, and manifested His glory to them, 
because He willed to show the same His weakness and agony in the 
garden, lest they should be offended at it, and that they might know 
that Christ thereby was proceeding to the glory which had been 
shown to them. For from this glory, and from the Father’s words 
This is My Son , they might know assuredly that Christ was very 
God ; but that He was hiding His Deity beneath the veil of the flesh; 
and that although he suffered and died upon the cross, His Deity 
neither suffered nor died. And He who could communicate so 
great a glory to His body, was indeed able to rescue that body from 
death if He so willed. Hear Damascene (Oral. de Transfig.) : 11 He 
took Peter wishing to show him that the testimony which he had 
borne was confirmed by the testimony of the Father ; and because 
he was about to become the president of the whole Church. He 
took James because he was about to die for Christ John because 
he was, as it were, the most pure instrument of theology, that behold- 
ing the glory of the Son of God, which is not subject to time, he 
might declare^ In the beginning was the Word? 

James , &c. This was James the Greater, who was the first of 
the Apostles to suffer martyrdom, S. Augustine (in cap. 2. ad 
Galat.) seems by a slip of memory to have thought that this was the 
Lord’s brother. 

Mystically. These three denote that those whom God prefers above 
others to behold the vision and glory of Himself are of a threefold 


Digitized by C^ooQle 



MOUNT TABOR. 


U1 


order. Peter denotes the fervent in charity ; John, a virgin, signifies 
virgins ; James, the first martyr among the Apostles, denotes those 
who suffer, and martyrs. Wouldst thou then see God? Be thou a 
Peter, firm in virtue; be thou a John in chastity; be thou a 
James by mortifying thy vices. 

Into a high mountain, See. This mountain, by its loftiness, repre- 
sents the height of the empyrean and of the celestial glory ; and to 
teach, tropologically, says Remigius, “ that it is necessary for all, who 
desire to contemplate God, that they must not wallow in grovelling 
pleasures, but by love of things above must be lifted up to heaven. 
Moreover they are led up by themselves apart, because holy men are 
separated from the wicked in their minds, and by the intention of 
their faith, and shall be wholly separated in the world to come.” 
For, as Bede says, they who expect the fruit of the resurrection ought 
to dwell in their mind in high places, and give themselves up to con- 
stant prayer. 

You will ask what mountain this was? The common opinion is 
that it was Mount Tabor. This is the opinion of the Fathers and of 
the faithful, so that it appears to be a tradition of the Church ; and 
therefore Mount Tabor is accounted by Christians to be holy. It was 
made famous by pilgrimages, as S. Jerome testifies. ( Epist \ 27.) For 
all who make a pilgrimage to the Holy Land, visit Tabor equally 
with Bethlehem, Mount Calvary, and Olivet. Thus S. Paula, twelve 
hundred years ago, when visiting the holy places, visited Tabor. For 
as S. Jerome says eloquently in her epitaph, “ She climbed Mount 
Tabor, on which Christ was transfigured.” 

That Christ was transfigured on Tabor is taught expressly by S. 
Cyril of Jerusalem ( Catech. 12), Damascene (Sant, de Transfig.), 
Bede and Euthymius, Abulensis, Maldonatus, Jansen, Adrichonius 
(Descript, terra sand.) and others, passim. Damascene confirms this 
from the words in Psalm lxxxix, 12, “ Tabor and Hermon shall rejoice 
in Thy Name.” For Hermon rejoiced when it heard the Father’s 
voice at the Baptism of Christ ; Tabor, when it saw Christ trans- 
figured upon it Then Tabor contended with the empyrean, being 
as it were the image and the theatre of celestial glory. For as the 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


248 


& MATTHEW, XV1L 


blessed behold the glory of God in heaven, so the Apostles beheld 
the glory of Christ on Tabor. Bede says, that in memory of Christ’s 
transfiguration in the presence of Moses and Elias three tabernacles 
were built on Mount Tabor, according to Peter’s wish, Let us make 
here three tabernacles. Nicephorus (lib. 8, cap. 30.) adds that S. 
Helena erected a splendid church on Tabor in memory of the Trans- 
figuration. To this temple were afterwards joined two monasteries, 
one dedicated to Elias, the other to Moses. 

Christ chose Tabor for the manifestation of His glory, 1. because it 
was near to Nazareth, where He was conceived, and the Word was 
made Flesh. 2. Because Tabor is nigh to Sharon, concerning which 
Isaiah sings (xxxv. 2) : “The gloiy of Lebanon is given unto it, the 
beauty of Carmel and Sharon. They shall see the glory of the Lord and 
the excellency of our God." 3. Because Tabor is an conceding high moun- 
tain. Josephus (lib. 4, de bcllo , c. 2) says it is 30 stadia in height, or 
nearly four Italian miles. 4. Because as Bede says, Tabor is in the 
middle of the Galilean plain, three miles to the north of Gennesaret 
It is round on all sides, rising with a gentle elevation from the 
plain; it is covered with grass and flowers, and is exceedingly 
pleasant ; it is a sort of paradise. Adrichomius adds that the climate 
of Tabor is exceedingly salubrious ; it is planted all over with vines, 
olives, and various sorts of fruit and other trees. It is verdant with 
constant dews, with the foliage of trees and green grass; and is 
always fragrant wiih the odour of all kinds of flowers. There is there 
a vast concourse of birds, who make delicious melody with their 
songs. On the exact spot of the Lord’s Transfiguration there is at 
present a garden, planted with trees and irrigated by fountains, and 
surrounded by a wall. The people who live at the foot of the moun- 
tain do not allow anyone to approach this spot out of reverence and 
devotion. 

Symbolically : Tabor in Hebrew is the same as bed of purity and 
light, ten, ta means bed, and or, light, and the beth in the 
middle signifies in. Thus it is, the bed in light. S. Jerome (Hosea, 
c. 5) gives another meaning. Tabor, he says, means the coming 
light. Again, Tabor may be translated, ta, Le., a bed and bor, i.e., 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



MANNER OF TRANSFIGURATION. 


*49 


a cistern or sepulchre ; because on Tabor Moses and Elias spake of 
the decease of Christ For by this way Christ must needs go to 
His glory and to Heaven, and we must go by the same way. Luke 
adds, Christ went up into the mountain to pray ; and it came to pass 
whilst He was praying the fashion of His countenance was altered , 
that He might show us the fruit of prayer — namely, that in prayer 
we are suffused with heavenly light, and are, as it were, transfigured ; 
and instead of earthly are made celestial and divine ; and instead of 
men become angels. Moses was a type of this when he tailed with 
God upon Mount Sinai, and the glory of the Lord appeared unto 
him, and there were horns (*.*., rays of light) on his face. But this 
splendour of Moses came from without ; but the glory of Christ 
from within, i.e., from His soul and Deity. 

And wds transfigured, &c. Greek, furepop+vOti, Le., was trans- 
formed. So also the Syriac. The Arabic is, He showed His glory in 
their presence. 

You will inquire after what manner Christ was transfigured? I 
take it for granted that nothing was done here in a fanciful or fan- 
tastic manner, or in the way of illusion. There could be nothing of 
this sort in Christ 

I say, then, in the first place— Christ did not transfigure Himself 
before His three Apostles to manifest His Divinity to them, as He 
does to the saints in Heaven ; for It cannot be beheld by any means 
with eyes of flesh. So the Fathers, passim. Wherefore Tertullian, 
SS. Chrysostom, Leo, and Damascene (who seem to speak otherwise) 
only mean to say that Christ showed His Apostles the external glory 
of His body, which was an index of His Divinity; that by it, as 
through a chink, they might in some sort behold the glory and 
majesty of His Godhead, even though veiled by the body. 

2 . Christ in His transfiguration did not change the essential form, 
fashion, colour, or other qualities of His countenance, but — as 
Euthymius rightly observes — He assumed a marvellous and, as it 
were, Divine splendour, so that He shone like the sun, yea with 
even greater and more august glory. Wherefore Matthew, explaining 
the expression He was transfigured, subjoins, and his face did shine 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



250 


s. Matthew, xvii. 


like the sun. And Luke, The fashion of His countenance was altered, 
i.e. y was bright and luminous. (See S. Thomas 3, p. q. 45.) By 
transfiguration, therefore, is meant that Christ transformed the 
external appearance of His face into a more glorious and august 
one. For Christ did not upon this occasion assume the other 
endowments of a glorified body — such as impassibility, swiftness, 
and so on — but of glory only. 

Here observe, in the first place, that this glory of Christ per- 
tained not only to His face, but to His hands also and His whole 
body, as S. Jerome clearly teaches (Epist. 61, ad Pammach .). For 
although Abulensis and others think that only the face of Christ 
shone, since Matthew and Mark make mention only of it, it is better 
to understand that the entire Body of Christ was resplendent, 
because it was a full and perfect transfiguration. Whence the 
glory passed to His raiment. So S. Ephrem (Orat. de Transfig.) s 
“ His raiment became white. Verily the Evangelist shows that the 
glory emanated from His whole body, and rays of glory shone from 
all His members.” S. Augustine (lib. 3 de Mirabil. S. Script c. 10) 
says : “ As the Divinity shone outwardly through the flesh, so also 
the flesh, being illuminated by the Divinity, was radiant through His 
garments.” This is the opinion also of S. Ambrose (in Symb. c. 22), 
Origen (in cap. ix. Levity Barradi, Suarez, and others; some of 
whom think that this splendour penetrated Christ’s whole body and 
rendered it translucent. But others, with greater probability, think 
that the glory pertained only to the superficies of His Body; and 
that that is the meaning of the word Transfiguration — that is, a 
a change of the figure, which has to do with what is external This 
splendour was celestial, yea more than celestial; it was divine and 
beatific, such as belongs to glorified bodies. Wherefore it was golden 
and glorious, like the sun ; but yet it gave refreshment to the eyes, 
and did not take away the sight of Christ from His Apostles. In 
this it was different from the light of the sun. 

Note, secondly, that this splendour, as well as the other gifts of a 
glorified body, appertained to the body of Christ throughout the 
whole time of His life, from the very moment of His Conception. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


reasons for the transfiguration. 


2 5 t 


Nevertheless, in order that Christ might suffer and have His conver- 
sation among men, this glory and all the other gifts which I have 
spoken of were held back, as it were, in the beatified soul of Christ, 
so that it did not infuse them into His body by means of a physical 
emanation. Otherwise they would "have shone through His body 9 
like light through a lantern. This repression, therefore, was a miracle. 
And the cessation of this repression in the transfiguration, and 
emanation of the interior splendour into the body of Christ was the 
cessation of a miracle. But to men it seemed to be a miracle, 
because it was new, and they were ignorant of the cause. Where- 
fore Christ possessed this glory of His body by a double right, 
namely, in right of the Hypostatic Union, and also by the title of 
merit For by so many sufferings and labours He merited this glory 
of His body, and at His resurrection He received it in perpetuity, 
as theologians teach, passim. Wherefore what some persons have 
thought — that Christ always possessed this glory and these gifts in 
His body, but that they were not visible to men on account of the 
infirmity of human sight; even as some say the glory of the bodies 
of the blessed would be invisible to the eyes of mortals, unless some 
new power of sight were given them — this opinion, I say, is not 
probable, because that light of the glorified body is corporeal, and 
therefore, in a higher degree, visible to the eyes of all. 

Lastly the Transfiguration happened on the 6th of August, on 
which day the Church commemorates it Ammonius, Baronius, 
Jansen, Suarez, and others, agree that it took place in the thirty- 
third year of Christ’s life, which was the third and last of His 
preaching. 

You will ask in the second place, why Christ was transfigured ? I 
answer : i, that by means of this glory and brightness* and by the 
testimony of Elias and Moses He might prove His Divinity to His 
Apostles, a. That he might forewarn His disciples not to lose con- 
fidence, when they should behold Him nailed to the cross. 3. That 
He might indicate that He shall come after this manner with great 
power and majesty to judge the world. So S. Ephrem, Cyril, and 
Damascene, S. Basil (in Psalm 45), and others. Wherefore also Elias 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



S. MATTHEW, XVII. 


252 

appeared, who will be the precursor of Christ when He comes to 
judgment 4. That He might animate the faith and hope and 
courage and zeal of the Apostles and the rest of the faithful bravely 
to undergo all crosses for the sake of the Gospel through the hope 
of obtaining the like glory at the resurrection. Thus S. Leo says, 
“ The Lord was transfigured, that He might take away the scandal 
of the cross from the hearts of His disciples.” And S. Chrysostom 
adds, that the least of the blessed in Heaven has greater brightness 
and glory than Christ had at His Transfiguration; because Christ 
attempered His glory to feeble eyes and the capacity of the, as yet, 
mortal Apostles. They whom the truth of the celestial glory irradi- 
ates count as utterly worthless all the pomps and vanities of this 
world. Wherefore S. Francis was wont to say, “ So great is the 
glory which I expect, that every kind of affliction is delightful to 
me.” 

Symbolically: This Transfiguration represents the varied and 
wonderful transformations of the Word incarnate, as it were a 
Divine Proteus. For Christ was four times transfigured. First 
in His Incarnation, when the Word being made flesh, shone in it 
as a light in a lantern, a. On the Cross, on which He was so de- 
formed with stripes and nails and spitting, that as Isaiah says, “ He 
hath no form nor comeliness, and when we saw Him, He had no 
beauty.” (c. liii.) 3. In the Resurrection, when He was crowned with 
glory and honour. 4. In the Eucharist, where he lies hid under the 
forms of bread and wine, and seems to be, as it were, transfigured 
into them. For transubstantiation is a sort of transfiguration of the 
accidents. 

Anagogically : Christ here wished to give a representation of our 
resurrection glory, when He will re-fashion our bodies to be like unto 
the body of His glory. 

TropologiccUly : Christ wished, in the first place, to give a type of 
the transfiguration of a soul dark with sins into that light of grace by 
which we are made like unto Christ For our transfiguration standeth 
in likeness, or configuration unto Christ; that we should be conformed 
unto Christ in all humility, charity and obedience ; that we should 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


THE SOUL TRANSFIGURED IN PRAYER. 2 $3 

be living images of the life and holiness of Christ ; that we should 
think, speak, and act with such piety, gravity, and zeal as Christ did; 
that whosoever sees us should think that he beholds Christ in us. 
Again Christ here gives a representation of the transfiguration by 
which a soul passes from a lower degree of holiness to a higher 
degree. For Christ who was already holy was transfigured. This 
transfiguration is more infrequent and more difficult than the former. 
For Saints often flatter themselves on account of their sanctity, and 
as it were rest in it, and do not aspire to higher sanctity, as sinners 
and penitents aspire to righteousness. It is less frequently, says a 
Father, that any one is transfigured from less to greater sanctity, than 
from sin to holiness. It can only take place in the mountain, and 
by going aside with Christ, that is to say, by frequent and fervent 
prayer and meditation. For in them the mind is illuminated by 
God, and draws as through a pipe celestial light, by means of which 
it conceives fresh ardour to reform its ways, yea to be transformed 
into Christ, that with S. Paul it may say, “ The world is crucified 
unto me. I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me.” And with S. 
Francis, it would imprint the five wounds of Christ, if not in its body, 
yet in the inmost recesses of its soul. 

Prayer, then, is the transfiguration of the souL x. Because in it the 
soul receives light from God, that she may know Him and herself 
and all things more clearly. 

a. By it the soul seeks and obtains grace to blot out the stains 
and vices by which she is deformed. In it she receives consolation 
for desolation ; out of weakness she is made strong; from slothful she 
becomes fervent; for perplexity, she hath understanding ; for sadness, 
gladness ; and for cowardice, courage. 

3. She is raised above herself, and is lifted up to God in heaven, 
where she learns and sees that all the things of earth are fragile and 
worthless, so that from her lofty height she lodes down upon them as 
fit only for children, She perceives that the true riches, honours, and 
pleasures are nowhere but in heaven. 

4. In prayer she unites herself to God. For, “ he that is joined 
unto the Lord is one spirit.” (i . Cor. vi. 1 7.) Hence S. Francis, when 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


S. MATTHEW, XVII. 


*54 

he prayed, was lifted up on high, and could speak, think of and love 
nothing else save God. “ My God and all,” he was wont to say, 
“ Grant me, O Lord, to die for love of Thy love, Thou who didst 
deign to die for love of my love 1 ” This is what S. Paul says, “ But 
we all, with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, 
are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the 
Spirit of the Lord.” (2. Cor. iiL 18.) 

Lastly, Mark intimates that Christ was not sitting, nor kneeling, 
but standing, when He was transfigured : When they awoke, they 
beheld His glory, and two men standing with Him who was standing 
likewise. Hence it follows that Christ was not lifted up into the 
air, as some painters represent Him, but was transfigured as He stood 
upon His feet 

His raiment became white — some read, as the light : thus the Greek, 
Ac to Thus also the Syriac and the Arabic. The Egyptian 
has, His face shone gloriously like the sun ; His raiment also was 
resplendent after the fashion of the sun . The Ethiopic has. His 
garments were like crystal But the Vulg. reads with the Persian Ac 
Xi*y, like snow . This is the reading of some Gr. MSS. in this place, 
and of all in Mark ix. 3. For snow is properly said to be white, and 
light, shining : although snow not only is white, but also shines. 
Abulensis (guest. 42 et seq.) is of opinion that this brightness of 
Christ’s raiment was a true and real property : and that therefore the 
colour of His garments was changed, in such manner that if they 
were previously black, they were made white, and if they were pre- 
viously white, they became whiter stQl : and that when the trans- 
figuration was over they returned to their former condition. 

S. Mark’s words seem in favour of this opinion, And His raiment 
became shitting, exceeding white as snow, so as no fuller on earth can 
white them. 

Christ’s garments therefore had two properties ; namely a snow-like 
whiteness like a fuller’s, and a supernatural splendour bestowed upon 
them by God. The far more general opinion is that the whiteness 
was identical with the brightness. For brightness is white, but it 
adds splendour to the whiteness. And this refulgence, by the opera- 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



CHRISTS GARMENTS ARE THE SAINTS. 255 

tion of God, flowed forth as it were from the flesh of Christ into 
His garments, and thus prevailed over, and as it were swallowed up 
their natural colour, if it were not white originally. Wherefore this 
glory in the face and the body of Christ was golden and shining, as 
in the sun. And when it was transfused to His clothes, it became 
white, as the moon appears to be white, when illuminated by the sun’s 
rays. And the sun itself appears white, when it shines through 
douds. Thus Tertullian (lib. iv. coni. Marc. c. 22.) So S. Ephrem, 
and many others. We shall get a full and adequate meaning by 
uniting both opinions, and say that the garments of Christ were 
indeed made white, through that snowlike whiteness which God now 
bestowed upon them, and that they were likewise resplendent through 
the brightness infused into them by means of the radiant face and 
flesh of Christ For this is what Luke means when he says, His 
raiment was white and glistening. Gr. e^airrpairrwv, i.e., like lightning 
darting rays like lightning. Whence it is plain that there was in the 
garments of Christ not only whiteness like snow, but a brightness like 
lightning. For white is the most perfect colour ; and light, or 
splendour is the most noble of all sensible qualities ; and lightning 
has the nature of fire, and is the most penetrating of all things, 

Tropologically : the garments of Christ are the Saints. They adorn 
Him like dothes : and like snow they are chaste and shine through 
their purity. 

And behold there appeared , &c. You will ask why these two 
appeared, rather than any of the other prophets? Maldonatus 
answers, because these two shall precede Christ’s second Advent to 
Judgment, when He shall come in His glorious Majesty, of which 
the Transfiguration was a type. This is true with respect to Elias, but 
wrong with regard to Moses, as I have shown on Rev. zl 3 and 4, 
where I have proved that Enoch, not Moses shall come with Elias 
against Antichrist 

I say then, that the reason was because Moses was the legislator 
of the Old Law, and Elias was the prince of the Prophets. Where- 
fore he represents the whole choir of the Prophets. These two ap- 
peared then, that they migh* show that Christ was the true Messiah, 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



S. MATTHEW, XVII. 


256 

the Saviour of the world promised by the Law and the Prophets, By 
Moses the Law is shown to end in Christ, and prophecy by Eli as 5 
and that bothhadaccomplished theirwork, and had given place toChrist 
as the new Lawgiver and Prophet sent from God, and promised by 
all the Prophets, but especially by Moses, in those words, “A Prophet 
shall the Lord your God raise up from the midst of your brethren, 
like unto me : and I will put My words in His mouth,” (Deut xviii. 
18.) Thus SS. Jerome, Chrysostom, Ambrose. S. Jerome adds that 
Moses and Elias were blessed with this vision, because like Christ 
they had fasted forty days and forty nights. Hence Tertullian, Origen, 
Nazianzen and others think this vision of Christ’s Humanity in the 
transfiguration was represented and promised to Elias when God 
manifested Himself to him by the breath of a gentle gale (1 Kings 
xix. 12 Vulg.\ and to Moses, when he asked to see God’s face, and God 
said to him, “ Thou shalt see My back parts, but My Face thou 
canst not see.” (Exodus xxxiiL 23.) This cannot be true in a 
literal, but only in a symbolical sense. 

S. Thomas (3 p. quasi . 45, art . 3, ad a) gives six other reasons : 

1. Because the multitudes said that He was Elias, or Jeremias, or one 
of the Prophets, He took the chief of the Prophets with Him, that 
he might declare the difference between the Master and the servants. 

2. Because Moses gave the Law, and Elias was jealous for the glory 
of the Lord : since therefore they appeared with Christ, they ex- 
cluded the calumny of the Jews, that Christ was a blasphemer of the 
Law, and that He usurped to Himself the glory of God. 3. He 
showed that He had the power of life and death, and is the Judge 
of quick and dead, because He had with Him Moses who was dead 
and Elias who was yet alive. 4. Because, as Luke says, they spake oj 
his decease^ that is, of His Passion and Death. Therefore that He 
might, in reference to this, strengthen the minds of His disciples, 
He brings before them those who had exposed themselves to death 
for God’s sake. For Moses presented himself before Pharaoh at the 
peril of his life, as Elias did before Ahab. 5. Because He wished 
His disciples to imitate the meekness of Moses and the zeal of Elias. 
6. Because He would show that He was preached both by the Law 
and the Prophets. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


HOW MOSES APPEARED. 257 

You will ask — how and in what manner did Moses and Elias 
appear? It is agreed by all that it was Elias himself who appeared 
in his own body. For Elias was taken up to Heaven in a chariot of 
fire, and is still alive, that he may come again and contend with 
Antichrist From Paradise, therefore, or from the place to which 
he was translated, he was suddenly transferred by an angel to Mount 
Tabor, that he might converse with Christ in His Transfiguration. 
With respect to Moses there are various opinions which I have re- 
viewed on the last chapter of Deuteronomy. It is certain, as I have 
there shown, that Moses is dead, and has not as yet risen again. 
Some think that this was not Moses who really appeared, but an 
angel in the form of Moses. But this is certainly an error, says 
Suarez, because Moses is introduced as a witness of Christ ; and a 
witness must bear testimony in his own person. None therefore of 
the expositors say that this was not Moses but an angel, except the 
Gloss on Luke ix. 30, which S. Thomas thinks is taken from the author 
of The Miracles of Scripture (lib. 3, caps. 10 6* 13). Jansen thinks 
it more probable that this Gloss is derived from S. Augustine (lib. de 
cura pro mortuis\ where S. Augustine expresses himself as doubtful 
whether the apparitions of the departed take place by themselves 
appearing, or by means of angels; or rather, as he says, in both 
ways. But he expresses no doubt as to the appearance of Moses in 
this place. Yea, even Calvin, although he says it is probable that 
this was the spectre of Moses, adds that it is more probable that it 
was the real soul of Moses. The soul then of Moses was translated 
from Limbus by an angel to the earth. And when Moses was 
arrived thither, he came to Tabor to Christ, and assumed a body, 
either formed by an angel out of air, as Lyra, Salmeron, and S. 
Thomas think, or else resumed his own body, so that he rose again. 
And thus the soul of Moses was led by an angel to his sepulchre, 
and there his ashes were collected by the angel and formed into a 
body, to which the power of God re-united his soul. And thus it 
was the true and living Moses, whom the angel transferred from his 
sepulchre to Mount Tabor. For it was meet that in witnessing to 
Christ, everything should be real and solid, and that Christ by thus 
VOL. 11. s 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



S. MATTHEW, XVII. 


*5* 

raising up Moses should show that He is both the Lord and the 
Judge of the quick and the dead. This is the opinion of Tertullian, 
Origen, Irenaeus, and others ; whom Suarez cites and follows (3 p . q. 
45, disp . 22, sect . 2). If you follow this opinion, and suppose that 
Moses rose again, you must suppose that he again died, and that he 
again rose with others after the Resurrection of Christ For Christ 
was the first of all who arose unto the life immortal. 

Observe, Christ communicated His glory and splendour to 
Moses and Elias. Wherefore Luke says, Moses and Elias were seen 
in glory . 

Talking with Him : Luke adds, and spake of His decease . The 
Greek for decease is not iKaraaiq (as though the ecstatic love ot 
Christ, which drove Him to the cross, were signified, as some pious 
people have thought), but ttoboc, i.e., going forth — namely, from 
Jerusalem, and from this life, by the death of the cross on Mount 
Calvary. This Moses and Elias here foretold to Christ in the 
hearing of the Apostles, that they might take away, both from them 
and us, the offence of the cross. Thus it is that some — with S. 
Chrysostom — instead of Ho&ov read tiotav, t\e. f glory; for on the 
cross Christ chiefly manifested His power and glory. Wherefore at 
that time the sun was darkened, the rocks rent, the earth quaked. 

Peter answered . ... it is good (that is, pleasant , sweet , and blessed ), 
&c. Pfcter here — exulting in the glory and, as it were, intoxicated — 
desired to abide in it, and enjoy it always ; whence the Arabic trans- 
lates, it is good that we should remain here. Damascene well observes, 
" It is not good for thee, O Peter, that Christ should tarry there : 
if He did, thou wouldst not obtain the keys of the kingdom of 
Heaven, nor would death have been abolished. Seek not felicity 
before the time, as Adam sought to be a god.” 

Theophylact remarks, We must not say with Peter, it is good for 
us to be here, since we ought ever to be going forward, and not remain 
in one degree of virtue and contemplation, but we ought to pass on 
to others. 

You will ask how Peter knew that the two persons who were talk* 
ing with Jesus were Moses and Elias? I answer, first, that he might 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



HOW PETER KNEW MOSES AND ELIAS. 259 

have recognised them from what they said. For Moses seems to 
have said to Christ — Hail, Messiah, our Saviour! Thou art He 
Whose Passion I prefigured by so many sacrifices, especially by the 
slain Lamb and the Passover. Elias may have said, Thou art He 
Whose resurrection I set forth by the widow’s son whom I recalled 
to life, and Whose ascension I prefigured when I was caught up to 
Heaven in a chariot of fire.— It may be also, that Christ addressed 
them by their names. 

2. Peter might have recognised them by their appearance and 
dress, as they were described in Scripture and the tradition of the 
elders. Thus, Elias might be known by his leathern girdle and 
sheepskin, wherewith he was wont to be clothed. Moses might be 
known by his homed face. Indeed, if we can believe Origen, 
Moses appeared with the tables of the Law, Elias with a chariot of 
fire. 

3, and most probably, Peter knew them by Divine inspiration. 
You will ask why Peter desired that these three tabernacles should 
be made, since the blessed do not need tabernacles ? I reply, Peter 
said this towards the close of the Transfiguration, when Moses and 
Elias were about to depart, in order that he might detain them. For 
Luke says, And it came to pass as they wen departing from Him , 
Peter said, &c. ; as though he said, “ O how sweet and delectable it 
is to abide in this vision ! Wherefore, O Christ, suffer not Moses 
and Elias to go away; and that we may keep them, let us make them 
a habitation, a tabernacle for each, in which they may abide.” It 
was for them, not for himself and James and John, he wished the 
tabernacles to be made. Mark adds, for he knew not what he said. 
It was as though Peter being inebriated with the sweetness of this 
vision, in order that he might prolong it, spoke, as if bereft of reason, 
things incongruous. He was in a sort of delirium. And that, first, 
because he thought Christ in His glory, as well as Moses and Elias, 
needed tabernacles, and three of them, as though one would not 
have sufficed. Again, he put Moses and Elias on an equality with 
Christ 2. Because he wished Christ to remain on Tabor, and to 
shut up Him who is the good of the universe on this mountain 

S 3 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


26 o 


8. MATTHEW, XVII. 


3. Because, being as yet subject to death and suffering, he desired to 
enjoy with Janies and John alone that blessedness to which God, 
through Christ, designed to bring an innumerable multitude after this 
life. 4. Because he wished to have glory before labour, a crown 
before the battle, joy before the cross, when it behoved Christ and 
Christians first to suffer, and so to enter into their glory. For the 
cross is the way and the ladder to happiness. 5. Because he placed 
his happiness in the sight of the glorified Humanity of Christ, not in 
the vision of the Godhead. If, therefore, Peter had beheld the glory 
of the Divinity and the abyss of all joy and all goodness, what 
would he have said? For this vision and pleasure of Peter were 
sensible and corporeal, and were only like a single crumb or drop in 
comparison with the joy and pleasure, which the blessed experience 
in beholding God, when they immerse themselves in Him as in a sea 
of delight, and are swallowed up in it, according to those words of 
the thirty-sixth Psalm : “ They shall be inebriated from the fatness 
of Thine house, and Thou shalt give them to drink of the torrent of 
pleasure.” Moreover, this vision of the glory of Christ, of Moses, 
and of Elias raised in the disciples not only vast pleasure, but 
wonder and reverence likewise, and a kind of sacred dread. Where- 
fore Mark says, they lucre sore afraid . 

While he was yet speaking . Observe Luke has, while he was yd 
speaking, a cloud came and overshadowed them; and they feared as 
they entered into the cloud. Which Toletus explains thus : Whilst 
Peter is saying Ld us make here three tabernacles, the cloud (contra- 
dicting him) interposed between Christ, Moses, and Elias on the one 
part, and the disciples on the other, and thus overshadowed them — 
that is to say, the disciples ; and the gloiy of Christ, dazzling the 
eyes of the disciples, was tempered by the intervention of this cloud, 
so that He could be more easily seen by them. And they — i.e. 9 the 
disciples— feared when they entered into the cloud ; t\e., when they 
beheld the cloud embracing Christ and Moses and Elias, and them- 
selves shut off from them by the cloud. They feared \ I say, because 
they saw that they were on the outside of the cloud, and because 
they were alone, and there was no one to defend them in case any 


Digitized by 


Google 



PROM WHENCE WAS THE CLOUD? 


26l 


evil should befall them. Or else they feared lest Christ and Moses 
and Elias should go somewhere else, or lest He should be carried 
away from them into Heaven, as Elias had been carried away in his 
chariot of fire. 

2. Barradi thinks that the cloud came after the departure of Moses 
and Elias, for Luke had previously said concerning them (verse 33), 
And it came to pass as they departed from Him , Peter said, &c. After 
that, the cloud overshadowed them, i.e., Christ and the disciples, who 
were left alone. And they feared, because they saw themselves enter- 
ing into the cloud, girt round about with it, and they did not know 
what was about to happen to them. 

Instead of, as they entered into the cloud (Luke ix. 34), the Syriac 
translates, when they saw Moses and Elias, who were entering into the 
doud. And instead of, as they departed from Him, the Arabic has, 
and when they wished to go away from Him , 

You will ask, from whence, and why was this cloud ? The answer 
is, it was made by God through the instrumentality of an angel, by 
the condensation of air and vapour, tha by it he might correct 
Peter's wish concerning the three tabernacles, by showing that Christ 
had no need of such things, forasmuch as His throne is a light and 
glorious cloud. Wherefore it is more probable that, as Franc. Lucas 
thinks, Peter, James, and John were within, not on the outside of 
this cloud : for the disciples were near to Christ and were His house 
and family. And for this very reason were these three Apostles 
brought up to the top of Tabor, that they might be sure witnesses to 
the rest of the Apostles and to the faithful what things were done in 
the cloud round about Christ ; and especially might bear testimony 
to God the Father’s voice, This is my Son . Therefore it was meet 
that they should see and hear all those things plainly and visibly, 
without a veil, or cloud, so that they might be eye and ear wit- 
nesses, above all suspicion of possibility of having been deceived, 
or mistaken. Moreover, the cloud is not only the veil, but the symbol 
of the glory of God. Hence of old time God was wont to manifest 
His incomprehensible majesty to the Hebrews, as is plain from Exod. 
tix. 9, and other passages. Wherefore the cloud is called the Ascen- 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


262 


S. MA 1 THEW, XVII 


tion, or the chariot of God (Psalm civ. 3) : also His tabernacle. His 
throne, and the seat not only of His majesty, but of the omnipotence 
of God, and the supreme power of His working. For from the 
clouds He hurls against His enemies hailstones and whirlwinds, 
thunderings and lightnings. (Psalm xviii. 12, &c.) Hence also 
when Christ shall come to judge the world, He will come in the 
clouds of Heaven. This cloud therefore was as it were an instru- 
ment for the voice of God the Father ; an ornament and grace for 
Jesus Christ : and for the Apostles a covert 

Moreover with reference to this cloud, Toletus is of opinion that 
Christ was transfigured in the night, during the time of sleep. And 
this was why, as Luke says, the eyes of the Apostles were heavy : there* 
fore too Christ's transfiguration appeared the more wonderful For so 
great splendour is more marvellous by night than it would be by day. 
But others with greater probability, think Christ was transfigured at 
the dawning of the day. They assign two reasons : first that what 
was done might not seem to be the work of magic or nocturnal 
spectres. Secondly, because Christ came for works of light : and 
the eyes of the Apostles were heavy on account of fatigue. Lastly, 
the dawn is on the confines between light and darkness. It is a 
delightful hour, and so the symbol of glory. 

The cloud was bright, 1. As an indication of the glory of Christ 
Whence Cajetan thinks that this cloud derived its brightness from 
the light and glory of the body of Christ ; or better, because by it 
was represented the glory and majesty of the Father whose voice was 
heard. Whence Peter calls this cloud (2 Peter i. 17) the eoccellenl 
glory of the Father, Who spake out of it; and Who by means of it 
increased the glory of the transfiguration of Christ This cloud 
therefore was full of majesty and glory. 

2. For the signification of the difference between the Old Law and 
the New. In the Old Law, God appeared to the Jews in a black 
cloud, because that Law was full of shadows and terrors. In the 
New Law, He appears in a bright cloud, because the New Law brings 
truth, glory and love. So S. Chrysostom, Theophylact and Dama- 
scene On the Transfiguration . 


Digitized by v^ooQle 


*Hfe TRINITY REPRESENTED. 


2 6 $ 

And behold a Voice t & c. The Voice, namely, of God the Father 
to Christ Observe, 1., with S. Chrysostom, Ambrose, Toletus, and 
others, that it is plain from Luke ix. 34 et seq. that this voice sounded 
from a doud high above the earth. Wherefore S. Peter in his Epistle 
speaks of it as coming from heaven. It must have come after the 
departure of Moses and Elias. And with this object, that it might 
be perfectly clear and certain to the Apostles that this voice was 
addressed to Christ alone, and not to Moses, or Elias, who had now 
gone away, Inasmudi as this voice was a work, ad extra , to use the 
expression employed by theologians, it proceeded from the whole 
Trinity. The voice was formed by an angel, since God makes use of 
His angels for these exterior works. 

Observe. 2. That in this transfiguration, equally as in the Baptism 
of Christ, the Trinity was symbolically represented. The Holy 
Ghost was represented by the doud, the Father by the voice, the 
Son by the Divine glory and brightness, by which likewise was set 
forth the Incarnation of the Word. For Christ was seen as man, 
and by the splendour and the voice of God the Father it was signi- 
fied that He was also God. The Holy Ghost was adumbrated by 
the cloud, because He, like a bright cloud, enlightens man, protects 
him, and makes him fruitful to every good work. He also blesses 
and glorifies. Hence in the Baptism of Christ, the Holy Spirit 
appeared in the form of a dove, because in Baptism He gives 
innocence. But in the Transfiguration, which is a type of the 
resurrection, He came under the appearance of a cloud, because 
He gave then, and will give in the resurrection security from all 
evils. 

This is My beloved Son : 94 Two pleasant words," says S. Cypnan 
(de Baptismo\ " Son and Beloved \ coming from the mouth of God, 
are impressed upon our senses, that the association of names may 
unite us in the community of gifts, and such great names of sweet* 
ness may soften our minds, and kindle the ardour of devotion.” 
Moreover, “ God the Father said not, 1 in this is My Son/ lest One 
from Another being placed apart, they should be supposed to be 
divided: but that according to the dispensation of Their union 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



264 


s. Matthew, xvh. 


They should be simply taken to be One and the same,” says the 
Council of Ephesus (ex prosphonet \ Cyril Imperator). 

Beloved , Syriac, most Beloved. There is an allusion to Ps. xxix. 
4. " The voice of the Lord is in magnificence, &c., and beloved as 
a son of the unicorns.” I have explained the various analogic* 
between Christ and a unicorn on 2 Pet. L 17. 

Hear him, not Moses, who has gone away, but Christ, as the new 
legislator of the New Law. These words, hear Him were not said 
of Christ at His Baptism, because He was then for the first time 
shown to the world ; but now He is set forth as a Teacher and Law- 
giver. Therefore (as Tertullian, S. Leo, Damascene, and others 
maintain) these words denote the abrogation of the Old Law, and 
the inauguration of the New. 

And when the disciples heard y &c. 1. Because this cloud seemed 

to them to portend something new, strange, and Divine. 2. Be- 
cause (as the Syriac has) they beheld Moses and Elias going away 
and entering into the cloud, and through it vanishing from their 
sight. 3. They were afraid when they heard the voice, because (as 
Abulensis says) it was as loud as thunder ; and though it was a sweet 
voice, yet its echoing reverberation terrified them. Thus, too, S. 
Ephrem says : " At the sound of this voice the Apostles fell flat 
upon the earth ; for terrible was the thunder, and the voice shook 
the earth ^ And S. Jerome says : “ Human weakness cannot sustain 
to bear the sight of this great glory ; trembling both in mind and 
body, it falls to the ground.” Origen, S. Chrysostom, and Euthy- 
mius add — that being struck with fear they fell upon their faces, 
that they might worship God, and make supplication unto Him that 
the thunder and lightning might not strike them. 

When they lifted up their eyes , &c. This signified symbolically that 
the Law and the Prophets had disappeared now that Christ was 
present, and that He Who brought to men the true light of the 
Gospel alone remained. Again : this glory and delight of the Trans- 
figuration quickly passed away, but Christ would show that all things 
in this world — even those that are lofty and divine — are transient, 
but that in Heaven they will be eternal, so that we may pant after 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


SEQUENCE OF EVENTS AT THE TRANSFIGURATION. 265 

it ; for on earth all things are measured by time, but in Heaven 
they possess an enduring eternity. 

Note : SS. Matthew, Mark, and Luke relate the history of the 
Transfiguration differently ; but the following is a series and order of 
circumstances, which will reconcile the Evangelists one with another. 

1. Christ prayed. In the meantime the disciples, being heavy with 
sleep, from the fatigue of ascending the mountain and the length of 
Christ's prayer, whilst they were sleeping, He was transfigured 

2. Moses and Elias came, and talked with Christ concerning His 
death upon the cross, which He was to accomplish at Jerusalem. 

3. The Apostles, being roused from sleep by the brightness and the 
talking, beheld the glory of Christ, and Moses and Elias conversing 
with Him. 4. When their conversation was ended, and they made 
as though they were going away, Peter being (as it were) inebriated 
with pleasure and grieving at their departure, sought to make three 
tabernacles. 5. There came the cloud, obscuring Moses and Elias ; 
and then the voice speaking to Christ, This is My beloved Son , when 
the Apostles, being affrighted, fell to the earth ; and were presently 
comforted and raised up by Christ ; and, lifting up their eyes, saw 
Jesus alone. 

And as they were coming down , &c. — to no one . Not only to the 
people, as S. Jerome says, but not even to the other Apostles ; that 
they might not give them an occasion of sorrow or envy because 
they were not present with Peter and James and John at the Trans- 
figuration. So Damascene : “ lest the madness of envy should drive 
the traitor 1o fury.” Whence Mark says, they kept the matter close 
betuteen themselves . The reason why Christ enjoined upon them this 
silence was, because there would a fitting time come for the reve- 
lation of this mystery ; and because the Apostles would understand 
and believe it when — after His Passion and death, in which they 
would be scandalized and troubled — they were about to behold Him 
rising again in glory, of which this Transfiguration was a type. For 
by Christ's resurrection they were about to understand of a surety 
that Christ underwent the death of the cross for us— not because He 
was compelled, but voluntarily, out of His exceeding love ; and that 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



266 


S. MATTHEW, XVII. 


now — being endowed with glory — He will come to judgment at the 
end of the world, and will crown with the same glory those who 
(after His example and precept) have denied themselves, have borne 
the cross, and in following Him have lost their lives for the sake of 
His love. 

And the disciples asked Him , &c. The reason of this question 
was ’because these three Apostles had seen Elias in the Transfigura- 
tion, and had beheld him going away. They marvel, therefore, that 
he did not remain and become the forerunner of Christ and His 
glorious kingdom, according to the prophecy of Malachi (iv. 5) — a 
prophecy quoted and enforced by the Scribes. But they erred, by 
confusing the times. They did not fully distinguish between Christ’s 
first coming in the flesh and His second Advent in glory. Of this 
latter Elias will be the precursor, as John the Baptist was of the 
former. But although the Apostles in some manner distinguished 
between Christ’s first Advent and His second (for the first they had 
seen, but had not yet seen the second), nevertheless they expected 
that the latter was nigh at hand. For they had heard Christ speak 
of His approaching resurrection, a*,type whereof they had beheld in 
His Transfiguration; and they thought, although erroneously, that 
after it Christ would immediately reign gloriously, inaugurating that 
kingdom of glory which He shall establish at His second Advent 
This was why they wondered, and asked why Elias did not remain 
that he might go before Christ 

Restore all things: that is, convert the Jews to Christ as the 
Messiah promised to themselves and their forefathers. As Malachi 
says : “ He shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and 
the heart of the children to their fathers.” See what I have there 
said. Matthew (as is usual with him) follows the LXX, which instead 
of turn, or convert , has a* m*a nun-facc, Le., shall restore. Hence the 
Arabic translates, shall teach you all things. 

But I say unto you, & c. Christ passes at once from the literal to 
the mystical Elias, *>., John the Baptist : for concerning John, the 
angel Gabriel had foretold to his father Zacharias, in S. Luke : “ And 
he shall go before Him in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


THE TWO ADVENTS DISTINGUISHED. 


267 


hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the 
wisdom of the just ; to make ready a people prepared for the Lord.” 
(L 17.) 

Falsely do the Calvinists refer all these things to the first Advent 
of Christ, and explain both mentions of Elias — viz., in verses 11 and 
12 — to mean John the Baptist. For they think that Elias, whom 
Malachi predicted shall come as the precursor of Christ (iv. 5), is 
John the Baptist, and that there is no other who shall come with 
Enoch before Christ’s second Advent I have refuted this error at 
length on Malachi iv. 5. 

For it was Christ’s intention in this place only to explain that 
saying of the scribes, derived from Malachi, “ Elias shall come, and 
shall show you Christ,” — that what Malachi had spoken of Christ’s 
second Advent might be applied mystically to His first For the 
Scribes did not distinguish between the two Advents of Christ, even 
as the Jews fail to do so stilL For they deny that Christ has come, 
and are expecting Him as still about to come, because Elias has not 
yet appeared to point Him out Christ therefore, that He might, in 
His condescension, give a full explanation to the Scribes, concedes 
that an Elias would be a precursor of both His Advents ; but that in 
the first it would be the typical, in the second the literal and real 
Elias. And He means to say that it was not because Elias had not 
yet come that the Jews persisted in not believing Him to be the 
Messiah, but because they were perverse and obstinate in their 
wickedness. For that Elias, who had been promised before Christ’s 
first Advent, namely John the Baptist, had already come, and had 
already pointed out Christ to the Scribes, that He was the Messiah ; 
and they would not believe him. Therefore Christ adds, and they 
knew him not , i.e., they refused to recognize him, as the precursor of 
Christ And they did unto him whatsoever they listed \ i.e., when he 
reproved their vices, they hated and persecuted him, and delivered 
him up to Herod, who sought his life. 

Then understood, &c. Viz., that John the Baptist was the mystic il 
Elias, and the forerunner of Christ 

And when He was come, &c. Luke adds, and it came to pass on 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



268 


S. MATTHEW, XVII. 


the following day, when He was coming down from the mounts &c. 
From this it is plain that this lunatic was cured on the day following 
the Transfiguration. 

A lunatic, Gr. aeXrjviaierai, that is at the changes of the moon, at 
new and full moon he suffers from epilepsy, not from any natural 
cause, but because he is beset by a devil The Arabic has, he is 
grievously vexed at the time of the new moon. Whence Mark has 
(ix. 17) : “And one of the multitude answered and said, Master, I 
have brought unto thee my son, which hath a dumb spirit: And 
wheresoever he taketh him, he teareth him : and he foameth, and 
gnasheth with his teeth and pineth away,” as is common in epilepsy. 
And Luke (ix. 39) : “ I beseech thee, look upon my son : for he is 
mine only child. And, lo, a spirit taketh him, and he suddenly crieth 
out ; and it teareth him that he foameth again, and bruising him hardly 
departeth from him.” Hence Origen, SS. Chrysostom and Jerome 
teach that the ordinary epilepsy is not to be ascribed so much to the 
moon and the state of the humours of the body, as to the devil, who 
makes use of the changes of the moon and vicious secretions. 
Mahomet, who suffered from epilepsy, pretended that he was seized 
and influenced by the Holy Ghost, when he was really possessed by 
Satan. For this reason too the Turks venerate persons suffering from 
epilepsy, as though they were under the influence of the Holy Ghost, 
and were prophets. When the moon is new and at the full, she 
increases and agitates the humours, especially the melancholic and 
phlegmatic humours of the brain, over which she has power. And 
she so acts upon them that they disturb the brain, and cause noises, 
spittings, and agitation of the whole body. For they who are afflicted 
with mania and epilepsy, are especially troubled with black bile, that 
is melancholy, at the time cf full moon, because then the moon brings 
more light and heat, though weaker than those of the sun. But the 
sun sets free, and puts into motion the black bile, though it does not 
consume it The black bile when set in motion, will produce these 
foamings, and noises, and gnashing of the teeth. And epileptic 
patients, on account of the phlegm and crude humours, are afflicted 
when the moon is waning, but especially at the new moon, because 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



HEALING OF THE LUNATIC 


269 


then the moon has less light and heat. And phlegm and phlegmatic 
humours are intensified by cold, especially when it becomes 
excessive. 

/ brought him , Ac. After the manner of men, he ascribes to 
the Apostles what was the fault of his own want of faith. 

O faithless generation , &c Origen thinks these words were 
addressed to the nine Apostles who remained below, when Christ 
took the other three with Him to the top of Tabor. He thinks that, 
as far as these nine were concerned, faith was weak. As S. Hilary 
says, “ Whilst Christ had gone up upon the mountain with three of 
the Apostles, a kind of torpor of faith crept over the remaining nine, 
who were left with the people, both because they heard from the 
father of the lunatic, and saw with their own eyes the magnitude of 
the evil, and the violence and raging madness of the demon within 
him . 99 But, with greater probability, SS. Jerome, Chrysostom, and 
Theophylact think these words were spoken to the father of the 
lunatic, and to the Jews and Scribes. For in them was greater 
incredulity, and by consequence they were more to blame that the 
devil was not cast out, than the disciples were. This may be 
gathered from Mark ix. 24, when the father, being asked by 
Christ if he believed in Him, answered: Lord , I believe ; help Thou 
mine unbelief. Nevertheless, Christ privately rebukes the Apostles 
(V. 20), because they had less faith than there was need of in so 
great a work. To the Jews, therefore, Christ said, O faithless and 
perverse generation. And Christ goes on to tell them that the reason 
why His disciples could not heal the child was not any want of 
power either on His part or on theirs. It was as though He said to 
the father of the child, “ I have given them power to cast out devils, 
but the obstacle is thine own unbelief and that of the Jews, which 
oppose the grace of God; because thou dost not believe, but 
doubtest whether I and they are able to heal him.” Thus 8. Cyril. 
“The words of Christ,” says S. Jerome, “are like those of a 
physician, who should see a patient acting contrary to his orders. 
He would say, 1 How long shall I keep coming to your house ? 
How long shall I have my trouble for nothing, whilst I order one 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


270 


S. MATTHEW, XVI L 


thing and you do the contrary?’ But it was not so much that He 
was angry with the man, as with his fault, and that in the person of 
one man He reproved the Jews for their unbelief, since he added 
immediately, * bring him to Me.' ” 

Bring him , &c. Mark adds (ix. 20), “ And they brought him 
unto Him : and when he saw Him, straightway the spirit tare him; 
and he fell on the ground, and wallowed foaming.” 11 After the 
demon perceived the Lord, he convulses the child,” says Titus of 
Bosra, “because, being angry at the presence of Jesus, and fearing 
Him, lest he should be driven out, he began to rage, and horribly 
to vex and torment the lunatic.” Mark proceeds, “And He asked 
his father how long is it ago since this came unto him ? And he 
said, * Of a child. And ofttimes it hath cast him into the fire, and 
into the waters, to destroy him : but if Thou canst do anything ’ 
[If Thou canst. See the incredulity which Christ reproved, for he 
doubted Christ’s power], ‘have compassion on us, and help us.’ 
Jesus said unto him, ‘ If thou canst believe, all things are possible 
to him that belie veth.’ * By believing in Me thou mayest obtain 
the healing of thy child. Suitably did Christ require that he should 
have faith in Him. It was not fitting that he should heal those who 
did not believe in Him, or that He should thrust His benefits upon 
those who turned away from Him. Mark proceeds, “ And straight- 
way the father of the child cried out, and said with tears, ‘ Lord, I 
believe; help Thou mine unbelief.’” That is, I believe, but I am 
weak in faith, do Thou increase and strengthen it, that whatsoever 
there is in me of doubt and unbelief may be taken away. We 
cannot doubt that Christ did hear such humble and such fervent 
prayers, and did take away from him all unbelief ; for by and bye 
He healed the child, as the child of one believing. 

And yesus rebuked the devil, &c. Mark adds : “ When Jesus 
saw that the people came running together, he rebuked the foul 
spirit, saying unto him, Thou dumb and deaf spirit, I charge thee, 
come out of him, and enter no more into him. And the spirit 
cried, and rent him sore, and came out of him : and he was as one 
dead ; insomuch that many said, He is dead. But Jesus took him 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



MIRACULOUS FAITH. 


371 


by the hand, and lifted him up ; and he arose.” From all this we 
see how very powerful and malignant this devil was, who had made 
the child deaf and dumb, and who dared so to resist Christ, and to 
bring the lunatic to the very point of death. From hence it seems 
probable that this demon had belonged originally to one of the 
superior orders of angels. For they too invade and possess men. 
This was why Christ’s disciples could not cast him out, but his expul- 
sion was reserved for Christ Himself, Who by His mighty power and 
command drove him forth. This is the meaning of the Greek — 
ixtrifiTjae, Le., He rebuked , and with threats commanded the devil, 
saying, I command thee , Come out of him ; and if thou dost not obey, 
I will punish thee severely. This, too, was why Christ said to His 
Apostles, when they asked Him why they could not cast him out, 
this kind gpeth out by nothing save by prayer and fasting. 

Jesus said , &c. The Arabic has, on account of the smallness of 
your faith. The Apostles had faith, but to cast out so powerful and 
fierce a devil greater faith was required than the Apostles possessed : 
whence the Syriac renders the next verse as follows — if there had 
been in you faith , &c. 

Verily I say unto you, &c. ; this mountain — viz., Tabor, from which 
I am coming down. This is miraculous faith, which is not different 
from justifying faith, as the heretics maintain, but the same ; for there 
is only one faith (Eph. iv. 5). This faith, however, is united with a sure 
confidence in God’s assistance to perform the miracle which is aimed 
at This confidence arises, first from the liberty of a holy conscience, 
which is familiar with God, which makes use of God as a friend, and 
penetrates into the treasures of His grace, that it may enjoy them ; 
according to those words of S. John (1 John iii. 21) : “Beloved, if 
our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God. 
And whatsoever we ask, we receive of Him.” 

2. From an interior instigation of God, as it were animating men, 
and stirring them up to such a miraculous work, and tacitly pro- 
mising them His help to effect it Vide Franc. Saurez, Tract, de Fide 
disp . 8, sect. 1, where he teaches that the faith of miracles, as regards 
its substance and essence, is an act of the Catholic faith, by which 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



2^2 


S. MATTHEW, XVII. 


we believe that God is omnipotent and faithful to His promises, and 
which is so drawn out and applied to the particular action, that it is 
able to beget the confidence which is necessary for working the 
miracle. From whence you may gather, that as this faith and con- 
fidence are in our own will and power, with the grace of God which 
He is wont to give, so also there is to some extent in our power the 
faculty of working miracles ; and the more any one increases in faith 
and confidence, the more does he increase in this faculty. The 
more familiar any one is with God, the more gifts does he obtain 
from Him, and Christ here signifies this ; and the same is plain from 
the lives and actions of the saints. Thus S. Bernard teaches, that 
we may gain the gift of prophecy, so that we may know the secret 
things of God, if in truth we cause ourselves to enter into most 
intimate friendship with God. For of this Christ speaks (John xv. 15) : 
“ I have called you friends, for all things which I have heard ol My 
Father I have made known unto you.” 

Faith) as a grain of mustard seed , i.e , faith small in appearance, 
but of great virtue and efficacy; humble faith, which boasteth not itself, 
and therefore small in man’s judgment, but verily quick, perfect, burn- 
ing like mustard seed. For when such faith is united to humility, 
it takes away every shadow of unbelief. It works miracles and 
removes mountains. This faith shone brightly, in S. Gregory, Bishop 
of Neocsesarea ; for he, when a mountain stood in the way of his 
building a church, by his prayers removed it to another place. (See 
Nyssen in his Life: and Eusebius, H. E. 7, 25.) He performed 
many other miracles, from which he received the name of Thauma- 
turgus, i.e. } wonder-worker. In like manner, a mountain in Tartary 
was removed by Christians, when a tyrant required such a miracle ot 
them in accordance with this promise of Christ (See Marco Polo, 
On Tartary) S. Jerome gives a similar instance in his Life of S. 
Hilarion. For he, when the sea, through an earthquake, raised vast 
masses of waters upon the shore — which threatened the city of 
Epidaurus with destruction — was placed by its citizens upon the 
shore as a bulwark against the waves. " He drew three figures ot 
the cross on the sand, and stretched forth his hands against the sea 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


temptation is a mountain. 


m 

when it was swelling to a vast height before him, when it stood 
still; and roaring for a long time, and (as it were) being angry 
with the bulwark, by degrees it sunk down to its ordinary level. 
Verily that which was said to the Apostles, If ye believe, ye shall 
say to this mountain , Be thou east into the sea, and it shall be 
done, may be fulfilled even to the letter. For what difference is 
there between a mountain going down into the sea, and immense 
mountains of waters being suddenly arrested at the feet of an 
old man?* 

Mystically: a mountain is severe temptation, especially to ambition 
and pride, as S. Jerome teaches. Such a temptation is best over- 
come by faith and hope. Wherefore S. Francis, being troubled by 
a dreadful temptation in spirit, betaking himself to prayer, with 
tears, heard a voice from Heaven, saying, “ Francis, if thou shalt 
have faith as a grain of mustard seed, thou shalt command this 
mountain to pass away, and it shall pass away.” He, not knowing 
what was the meaning of the oracle, cried out, “ Lord, what is this 
mountain?” The answer came, “The mountain is temptation.” 
Then Francis added, with many tears, “ O Lord, be it unto me 
according to Thy word.” And immediately all the temptation was 
removed, and he obtained perfect tranquillity. (Wadding, in Annal . 
Minor . a.d. 1218, num. 2.) 

This kind, &c. Observe first, this kind does not mean every kind 
of demons, as S. Chrysostom thinks, but those of a higher order, 
which are most powerful, obstinate and malicious, like this one whom 
Christ here cast out. 

Observe secondly. This sort of demons can only be driven out by 
prayer and fasting ; because these two things lift men up from the 
flesh to God. As S. Chrysostom says, “ Fasting is the chief work of 
the higher philosophy, and places men on a level with angels, and 
vanquishes the incorporeal powers.” 

Observe thirdly. Christ does not require prayer and fasting in both 
the person who works the miracle and in him for whose benefit the 
miracle is wrought, as S. Chrysostom supposes, but in him only who 
works the miracle, as Origen has observed Yet there can be no 
VOL. 11. T 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



274 


S. MATTHEW, XVII. 


doubt that faith and prayer on the part of the recipient greatly aid in 
the working of the miracle. 

You may say, that it is not said of Christ, when He cast out this 
devil, that He prayed or fasted. I answer, that He had prayed and 
fasted a little while before, when He was transfigured on Mount 
Tabor. Besides, prayer and fasting are required in mere men, not 
in Christ, who was God, and as God, was able by His word alone to 
put the devils to flight, yea to annihilate them. So Abulensis. 

While they abode, &c. Christ reiterates His prophecy concerning 
His Cross and Passion, which He uttered first at Caesarea Philippi 
(xvi. 22), that the disciples might not be aftrighted, nor scandalized 
when the time came, nor fall from faith in Him as the Messiah, 
because He suffered such a shameful death. For the Cross was an 
offence to the Apostles, so that they all forsook Him and fled. The 
Cross therefore needed to be again and again preached to them, and 
impressed upon them, so that they might know that Christ did not 
suffer it because He was compelled, but of His own will, and in 
obedience to the Father’s will; that He might redeem mankind. 
Moreover He reiterated this preaching of the Cross in Galilee, after 
He had healed the lunatic when He came down from Tabor, and the 
Galileans on account of that miracle had given Him great praise and 
honour, as we may learn from SS. Mark and Luke, in order that He 
might repress any vain-glorious thoughts which were likely to arise in 
the minds of the Apostles, by putting them in mind of His Cross 
and Passion. 

And shall kill Him, &c. When the Apostles heard speak of Christ 
being put to death, because they were unwilling that He should die, 
and that they should be separated from Him by death, He alleviates 
this their sorrow by adding, And the ihira day He shau rise again. But 
they did not understand these words of Christ They were not able 
to receive them. Whence they were, iur a long time, doubtful con- 
cerning His resurrection. And this was why Christ by many appari- 
tions and miracles was obliged 10 convince them that He had really 
risen again, so that He might root out all doubt from their minds 

And when they were come, &c. . • . tribute, the Syriac adds, poll 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



THE TRIBUTE MONEY: WHAT? 


*75 


tax , as paid by each individual Pay tribute , the Arabic has, pay 
what is due . The collectors do not make an assertion, but ask a 
question, because these tax-gatherers were newly in office, or at least 
had fresh servants, who did not know, or did not remember that in 
the year which was past, Christ had paid the tribute at Capernaum, 
as other people did. 

Tribute money : The Gr. and the Vulg. have didrachma , that is, a 
half shekel, equal in value to two Spanish reals. The shekel weighed 
four didrachma. See what I have said on Exodus xxx. 13. Baronius 
and others are of opinion that this didrachma was the sacred half 
shekel, which was required by the Divine law to be paid to the 
temple. (Exodus xxx. 13.) 

There God ordained that every Israelite male of twenty years old 
and upward should pay a half shekel for the service oi the Sanctuary. 
This was when a census was taken. But subsequently, the Jews of 
their own accord, out of devotion, and that they might more entirely 
fulfil the law, decreed that all should pay this half shekel every year 
for the sustentation of the Priests and Levites, for repairing the 
temple, for furnishing victims for the sacrifices, and many other 
similar purposes. All this is plain from 2 Chron. xxiv. 5, 6, 7: also 
from Josephus, who shows that the Jews who lived at a distance 
from the Holy Land were accustomed to collect this sacred 
didrachma, and send it to the temple at Jerusalem. (Jos. Ant. 
xviii. 12.) 

But the tribute here spoken of was a civil tax, and payable either 
to the Romans, or to Herod Antipas. This is seen from Christ's words 
to Peter — of whom do the kings of the earth take custom, or tribute ? 
This then was royal tribute, and payable either to a king or an em- 
peror. The same thing is plain from xxii. 21, where the Herodians 
ask Christ, “ whether it were lawful to pay tribute to Caesar or not ?” 
The origin of this tribute being levied was a little before the time of 
Christ, when Hyrcanus and Aristobulus, the grandsons of Simon 
Maccabaeus were contending which should have the high priesthood* 
Pompey, being called in to arbitrate between them, adjudged it to 
Hyrcanus: but the people of Jerusalem, who favoured the other can- 

T 2 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


276 


8. MATTHEW, XVII. 


didate, restored it to Aristobulus. After that Pompey took Jeru- 
salem, and reduced Judea to subjection to Rome, and exacted an 
annual tribute. Moreover because the Jews were accustomed to pay 
a didrachma to the temple, they were also ordered by the Romans 
to pay the same sum to them, until after the rebellion, when Jeru- 
salem was besieged and captured by Vespasian, and the temple 
destroyed, he ordered them to pay that didrachma to the Roman 
capitol. The Jews greatly disliked paying this tribute to the Romans. 
They said that they were the people of God, and therefore free ; and 
that they ought to pay tribute to Him, not to Caesar. This feeling 
it was which gave rise, about the time of Christ, to the sect of the 
Galilaeans, whose leader was Judas of Galilee, who refused all pay- 
ment of tribute to Caesar, and all acknowledgment of his authority. 
Christ and His Apostles were suspected of belonging to this sect, 
because they were Galilaeans, and were preachers of the new, heavenly 
kingdom. In order therefore that Christ might show the groundless- 
ness of this imputation, He, on the present occasion, paid the 
didrachma. So S. Jerome, Bede, Jansen, and others. The collectors 
of the tribute did not venture to ask Christ Himself for it, on ac- 
count of the fame of His sanctity and miracles ; but they said to 
Peter, in private, is not your Master accustomed to pay the 
didrachma ? 

He said , yea : Peter asserted that it was Christ’s custom, as he 
had seen in previous years, always to pay this tribute. 

When He was come into the house, hired by Christ at Capernaum, 
as I have said, iv. 13. 

And He said \ & c. Christ being conscious in His spirit of the 
conversation which had passed between Peter and the tax collectors, 
prevented him , i.e., first asked him about the matter, and showed that 
He was not under obligation to pay this tribute. The kings of the 
earth, &c. It is an argument from the less to the greater, as S. Chiy- 
sostom teaches : in this way, the children of kings, of common right, 
are free from the tribute paid to kings. Much more therefore am I, 
together with My Apostles, who are My family ; I, I say, who am king 
of kings, and the true and only begotten Son of God Himself, free 


Digitized by v^ooQle 


j 



THE CLERGY NOT EXEMPT FROM TAXES. *77 

from every kind of tribute which the kings of the earth impose upon 
their subjects. So S. Jerome and others. 

Wherefore certain Canonists are wrong in gathering from this 
reasoning of Christ that the clergy, by Divine right, are exempt from 
all taxes. For by parity of reasoning it might be concluded that all 
Christians are exempted from payment of taxes, as the Anabaptists 
assert For Christians are the adopted children of God, bom again 
in baptism. The falsehood of this idea is shown by the Apostle 
(Rom. xiii. 7) and the whole Church : for this adoption pertains to 
a higher order of inheritance, even a Heavenly one. Properly, how- 
ever, in accordance with these words of Christ, kings and princes 
have exempted ecclesiastics, who are of the household and family of 
Christ, from the payment of taxes. And this is all which is meant 
by S. Jerome and the Canons when they say that the clergy are 
exempt from taxes, not only by human but Divine right ; because, 
in truth, Divine right intimates that this exemption ought to be con- 
ceded. (See Lessius de Justitia , /. 2, c. 33, dub . 4, where he shows 
that the exemption of the clergy from paying taxes is not of Divine 
but of human right.) 

Nevertheless, &c. It is as though He said, lest the collectors 
should be offended, and think we despise Tiberius Caesar, as a Gen- 
tile, and reject his authority, like Judas of Galilee. Piece of money , 
Greek and Vulgate stater: this is the same as the Hebrew shekel, 
namely a pound. For formerly money not stamped was paid by 
weight The shekel weighed four drachmae, which were equivalent 
to four Spanish reals, or a florin of Brabant Observe, Christ here 
afforded an example of justice, humility and obedience, and taught 
that Christianity is not opposed to civil government, but is rather an 
aid and advantage to it 

For Me and thee. You will ask why Christ only paid this tribute 
for Himself and Peter ? I answer, He did not pay for the rest of 
the disciples, either because, as Lyra thinks, only the heads of 
families were bound to pay this tribute, or because the disciples of 
Christ were poor men. Wherefore Christ tacitly desired that they 
should be excused by the tax gatherers on account of their poverty 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


S. MATTHEW, XVII. ’ 


276 

or because they belonged to other places, and had already paid the 
tribute in those cities. Lastly, Abulensis thinks that for all the 
Apostles, who had wives and children, and therefore were heads ot 
families, this didrachma was paid out of the common coffer which 
Judas carried; and that Matthew only related the payment of Christ’s 
didrachma because of the miracle of its being found in the mouth 
of the fish, that He might show that He was not under an obligation 
to pay it, nor was subject to Csesar. For Peter, however, Christ 
paid, both because Peter was the instrument of the exaction, as well 
as of the payment, as also because Peter had a house and family at 
Capernaum. It was also honoris causa , to intimate that Peter was 
the vicar of his Church and household, and destined by him to be 
the head and prince of the rest of the Apostles. So SS. Chrysostom, 
Jerome, Origen, and others. 

Moraliter • Learn from hence Christ’s zeal for poverty, that He 
had not at home so much as one shekel to pay the tribute, but ob- 
tained it miraculously from a fish, that he might teach that God by 
means of fishes and the rest of the creatures provides necessary things 
for the poor in spirit, as He provided food for Elias by the ministry 
of ravens. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



CHAPTER XVIII 


I Christ warmth his disciples to be humble and harmless : 7 to avoid offences , and 
not to despise the little ones: 15 teacheth how we are to deal with our brethren , 
when they offend us : 21 and how oft to forgive them : 23 which he setteth forth by 
a parable of the kmg> that took account of his servants , 32 and punished him , who 
shewed no mercy to his fellow. 

A T the same time came the disciples unto Jesus, saying, Who is the greatest in 
the kingdom of heaven ? 

2 And Jesus called a little child unto him, and set him in the midst of them. 

3 And said, Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as little 
children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. 

4 Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, the same is 
greatest in the kingdom of heaven. 

5 And whoso shall receive one such little child in my name receiveth me. 

6 But whoso shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it were 
better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were 
drowned in the depth of the sea. 

7 5 Woe unto the world because of offences ; for it must needs be that offences 
come ; but woe to that man by whom the offence cometh ! 

8 Wherefore if thy hand or thy foot offend thee, cut them off, and cast them 
from thee, it is better for thee to enter into life halt or maimed, rather than having 
two hands or two feet to be cast into everlasting fire. 

9 And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee : it is better 
for thee to enter into life with one eye, rather than having two eyes to be cast into 
hell fire. 

10 Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones 5 for I say unto you, 
That in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in 
heaven. 

11 For the Son of man is come to save that which was lost 
12 How think ye? If a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them be gone 
astray, doth he not leave the ninety and nine, and goeth into the mountains, and 
seeketh that which is gone astray ? 

13 And if so be that he find it verily I say unto you. He rejoiceth more 
of that sheeps than of the ninety and nine which went not astray. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



280 


S. MATTHEW, XVIIL 


14 Even so, it is not the will of your Father which is in heaven that one of 
these little ones should perish. 

15 Moreover, if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his 
fault between thee and him alone : if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy 
brother. 

16 But if he will not hear thee % then take with thee one or two more, that in the 
mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established. 

17 And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the church : but if he 
neglect to hear the church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a 
publican. 

j 8 Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound 
in heaven ; and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. 

19 Again I say unto you, That if two of you shall agree on earth as touching 
anything that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in 
heaven. 

20 For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the 
midst of them. 

21 U Then came Peter to him, and said, Lord, how oft shall my brother sin 
against me, and I forgive him ? till seven times ? 

22 Jesus saith unto him, I say not unto thee, Until seven times; but Until 
seventy times seven. 

23 Therefore is the kingdom of heaven likened unto a certain king, which would 
take account of his servants. 

24 And when he had begun to reckon, one was brought unto him which owed 
him ten thousand talents ; 

25 But forasmuch as he had not to pay, his lord commanded him to be sold, 
and his wife and children, and all that he had, and payment to be made. 

26 The servant therefore fell down, and worshipped him, saying, Lord, have 
patience with me, and I will pay thee all. 

27 Then the lord of that servant was moved with compassion, and loosed him, 
and forgave him the debt. 

28 But the same servant went out, and found one of his fellow-servants which 
owed him an hundred pence ; and he laid hands on him, and took him by the 
throat, saying, Pay me that thou owest 

29 And his fellow-servant fell down at his feet, and besought him, saying, 
Have patience with me, and I will pay thee alL 

30 And he would not ; but went and cast him into prison, till he should 
pay the debt 

31 So when his fellow-servants saw what was done, they were very sorry, and 
came and told unto their lord all that was done. 

32 Then his lord, after that he had called him, said unto him, O thou wicked 
servant, I forgave thee all that debt, because thou desiredst me : 

33 Shouldest not thou also have had compassion on thy fellow-servant, even 
as I had pity on thee ? 

34 And his lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormentors, till he should 
pay all that was due unto him. 

35 So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your 
hearts forgive not eveiy one his brother their trespasser 


Digitized by 


Google 



THE DISCIPLES JEALOUS. 


28l 


At that time came , &c. There seems to be a discrepancy here 
with Mark ix. 31, where it is said that the disciples disputed about 
this matter in the way, and that afterwards, when they were in the 
house, Christ prevented them, and asked them what they were doing 
in the way? S. Chrysostom answers that the Apostles had often 
disputed about this same matter, and at length Christ anticipated 
them with this question. When, therefore, they saw that their 
thoughts were known to Christ, they opened the matter to Him of 
their own accord, and asked him to resolve their question for them. 
Various things gave rise to these disputations, but the immediate 
cause was Christ having paid the didrachma for Peter only. Hence 
they envied him, as preferred to them, and then each began to be 
anxious that he might be promoted to the first rank. Hear S. Jerome, 
“Because they saw that the same piece of money had paid the 
tribute both for the Lord and Peter, from the equality of the pay- 
ment, they thought Peter was preferred above the rest of the Apostles. 
Therefore they asked, who is the greatest in the kingdom of Heaven f 
Jesus knowing their thoughts, and understanding the cause of their 
error, desired to heal their desire of glory by teaching them to con- 
tend in humility .” Again, they saw that Peter, James and John had 
been taken apart by Christ on Tabor, and they grieved that they 
too had not been taken. Lastly, they had heard that Christ was 
shortly to die, and rise again, and enter into His glorious kingdom, 
and they prematurely were occupying themselves about these things, 
and seeking how they might become chiefs. 

Ihe greatest, i.e., in the kingdom of Messiah, which the Apostles 
expected Christ would establish on the earth indeed, though a 
heavenly and Divine kingdom, that is, in the Church. For the 
Church Militant on earth is tending towards the Church Triumphant 
in Heaven, as to the kingdom promised it by Christ Maldonatus 
understands the passage as follows : He who is less, i.e., more humble 
in the Church is greater in the Church, and therefore greater in the 
kingdom of Heaven. He proves this : 1, from the occasion of this 
question, because from Christ's having paid the didrachma for Peter, 
the Apostles conjectured he was to be the future head of the church; 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



282 


S. MATTHEW, XVIII. 


2, because Christ regarded the question as a mark of ambition : and it 
it is ambition to seek the first place in the Church, but not in Heaven 
Charity persuades us to seek the first places in Heaven. This ex- 
planation is probable ; but we may understand the passage more 
simply, by taking the kingdom of Heaven to mean literally Heaven. 
The Apostles are charged by Christ with ambition, because they 
looked upon the kingdom of Heaven like an earthly kingdom, 
which is often compassed because of pride, and even seized by force 
of arms. 

And Jesus called a little child, &c. Mark adds that He took 
him in His arms. It is thought, says Jansen, that this little boy 
was S. Martial, who afterwards became a disciple ot S. Peter, and 
was sent by him to preach the Gospel in Gaul, and converted the 
inhabitants of Limousin, of Toulouse, and Bourdeaux. But others 
say that S. Martial was one of the seventy-two disciples. He could 
not, therefore, have been a little child at this time. 

Converted, i.e., from this emulation and ambition of yours, which 
is at least a venial sin, and therefore an impediment to entrance into 
the kingdom of Heaven. 

As little children: for, speaking generally, they do not envy 
others, nor covet precedence, but are simple, humble, innocent, and 
candid. I say generally, for S. Augustine ( Confess . /. 1, c. 7) testifies 
that he had seen an infant at its mother's breasts growing pale with 
envy, because he saw his twin brother sucking at the same breasts. 
But there is no little child who is ambitious of a kingdom, or of the 
first place in a kingdom, as the Apostles were. 

Christ bids us become like little children. Briefly, and to the 
point, does S. Hilary sum up their characteristics which ought to be 
imitated by believers. “They,” he says, “follow their father; they 
love their mother : they wish no evil to their neighbour ; they regard 
not the care of riches ; they are not wont to be insolent, nor to hate, 
nor to tell lies. They believe what they are told ; they regard as 
true what they hear. Let us return, therefore, to the simplicity of 
little children, for when we have that, we bear about with us a like- 
ness of the Lord's humility.” 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



HUMILITY CONFORMS TO CHRIST, 


The way, therefore, to Heaven is humility ; and the entrance and 
the door of Heaven is humility, because, save through it, there is 
no access to Heaven. S. Antony saw in spirit the whole world full 
of gins, and souls who desired to fly to Heaven caught in them, and 
being thus ensnared by the demons, thrust into helL He cried out 
with groans, “O Lord, who shall escape all these snares?” And 
he heard the answer, “ Humility shall escape them all.” Christ, that 
He may cure the ambition of His disciples by a zeal for humility, 
makes use of three reasons to persuade them. The first is in this 
verse, in which he declares that none who are devoid of it shall 
enter Heaven. The second is in the following verse ; that humility 
exalts, and that if you wish to be great in the kingdom of Heaven 
you must be small and humble on earth. The third is in the fifth 
verse ; that humility is conformity to Christ, Who humbled Himselt 
below the Apostles and all men, Who humbled Himself even unto 
death. Therefore, whoso receiveth him that is humble receiveth Christ 
Whoso shall humble himself \ &c., i.e., shall be as humble through 
virtue as this little child is by nature : or who shall be lowly in mind as 
he is little in body. Christ then bids us become like little ones, not 
in want of wisdom but in simplicity and innocence, and directly in 
humility. Thus the Apostles (1. Cor. xiv. 20). “Brethren be not 
children in understanding : howbeit in malice be ye children, but in 
understanding be ye men.” Origen gives the reason, " A little child 
has no overweening ideas of himself, and does not boast of rank or 
riches. We see that infants until their third or fourth year, even if 
they belong to the nobility, put themselves on an equality with 
boys of lowly birth, and are as ready to love poor children as rich ones.” 
Moraliter : learn here the paradox of Christian wisdom. If you wish 
to be great in heaven, desire to be unknown on earth, and to be little 
among men, to be despised and made of no account If you wish 
to be raised to the chief thrones in the empyrean, place thyself even 
below the feet of Judas, as S. Francis Borgia did. For it has been 
fixed and sanctioned by the eternal law of God, that “ whoso exalteth 
himself shall be abased, and he that humbleth himself shall be 
exalted.” There once was seen a lofty and glorious throne among 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



284 


S. MATTHEW, XVIII. 


the Seraphim, and a voice was heard which said, “ This seat is kept 
for the lowly Francis.” So Bonaventura in his life. 

Humility is grateful and honourable with God, with angels and 
with men. Even if you would act upon mere policy, you must 
embrace humility, because it is in favour with all men. Hence 
courtiers, be they as ambitious as they may, yet marvellously humble 
themselves both in word and deed ; but because they labour under 
the secret arrogance of the mind, it is difficult for them not to betray 
their hauteur from breaking out by some indication in their counte- 
nance. S. Jerome, or rather S. Paulinus ( Epist '. ad Celant . 14), says, 
“You can have nothing more excellent, or more loveable than 
humility. She is the chief preserver, and as it were the guardian of 
all virtues. And there is nothing which can make us so pleasing to 
God and men, as that when we are deservedly great by reason of our 
life, we should be the lowest by reason of humility.” As the Scrip- 
ture says, * The greater thou art, humble thyself in all things, and 
thou shalt find favour before God.” Moreover S. Jerome says {Eft’s. 
45, ad Anton. \ “Our Lord as a teacher of humility to His disciples, 
when they were disputing about dignity, took a little child and said, 
whosoever of you shall not be converted to be like an infant, cannot 
enter into the kingdom of heaven. But that He might appear not 
only to teach, but also to do, He fulfilled this by His example, when, 
whilst washing His disciples’ feet, He kissed His betrayer ; when 
He conversed with the Samaritan woman; when He talked with 
Mary sitting at His feet about the kingdom of heaven ; when, rising 
from the dead, He appeared first to the women. But Satan 
fell from the state of an archangel for no other cause than pride, 
which is the vice contrary to humility.” Humility, therefore, makes 
man to become an angel, even as pride made an angel become a 
devil. The first gift which is given to a man from beholding the 
Divine light is self-knowledge, says S. Denys {Epist 7, ad Jltum\ 
and this is humility. For humility is a virtue by which a man thinketh 
vilely of himself through self-knowledge, and reckons himself inferior 
to all; either because he esteems himself viler, weaker, or more 
wretched than all, or because he piously thinks others are endowed with 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



CHRIST DELIGHTS IN CHILDREN. 285 

greater grace and other gifts of God than he is. That is a golden 
saying of blessed Nilus : “ Blessed is he whose life is lofty, his spirit 
lowly." Hear, too, the words of Caesarius {Horn. 30) : “ As from 
an earthly fountain, or a terrestrial river, no one can drink unless he be 
willing to stoop ; so also no one can draw living water from Christ, 
the Fountain of Life, and from the river of the Holy Ghost, unless 
he shall humble himself, according to that which is written — ‘ God 
resisteth the proud.’” Lastly, S. Jerome gives a mirror of humility 
in S. Paula, of whom he writes thus in her epitaph : M She shines, 
amongst a multitude of gems, as the most precious of all, and, as a 
ray of the sun, obscures the little sparkles of the stars. Thus she 
surpassed the virtues of all by the power of her humility. She was 
the least of all, that she might become greater than all ; and the 
more she cast herself down, the more she was lifted up by Christ. 
She was obscure, and yet she could not lie hid. By flying from 
glory, she merited renown, which follows virtue like its shadow, and 
—deserting those who hunger after it — seeks those who despise it.” 
Whoso receiveth , &c. That is in hospitality, to his table, by favour, 
or by assisting in any other .way. By receive is here meant any kind 
of benefit, or charity, or benevolence. Observe, Luke has this little 
child. From this it appears that Christ speaks : 1. Of a child who is 
truly a little one : 2. Of a mystical child, viz., of a person who is 
lowly and humble. He rises from one to the other, playing upon 
the expression little one (parvulus). It is as though Christ said, “ So 
pleasing is humility to Me, that I delight in children, because they 
bear humility about with them, in appearance, in their stature, their 
age, their innocence : and I would have all My disciples become 
little children, and imitate little children, and so deserve to be received 
by all men. For men will think that in them they receive Me, be- 
cause they receive them for My sake. For of Me Isaiah prophesied 
“Unto us a child (J>atvulus) is bom, to us a son is given.” Like 
unto this is the voice of Christ in the following chapter, verse 14. 
S. Jerome observes that a little one is here spoken of, “ because he 
who is offended is a little one ; for those who are older do not take 
offence.” Mark and Luke add, He that receiveth Me, receiveth Him 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


286 


S. MATTHEW, XVIII. 


that sent Me. Luke gives the reason, He that is least among you ally 
i.e., who is the most humble of you ally he is the greatest , that is to say, 
with Me and My Father which is in Heaven. “ He is lowly,” says S. 
Augustine, ft who chooses rather to be an abject in the house of the 
Lord than to dwell in the tabernacles of sinners.” ( Vulg.) This 
saying of Christ, S. Elizabeth, the daughter of the King of Hungary, 
stamped upon her very inmost heart She fed and served daily 
nine hundred poor people, sick, full of scabs and ulcers. The lepers 
she washed with her own hands, wiped and kissed their ulcers. In 
such offices she delighted, and was wont to say, “ How good and 
kind the Lord is to me, in that He suffers me to wash and wipe 
these people.” 

Whoso shall offend , &c. Syriac, shall be for a stumbling block to . 
That means, as Theophylact says, shall injure , as S. Chrysostom says, 
shall despise. It is opposed to the word, shall receivCy in verse 5. So 
Maldonatus. But it is better to take, as Jansen does, the word 

offence in its proper meaning. For this is plain from what follows. So 
there is an antithesis between it and receive. As thus, he who shall 
receive a little child in My name, &*.,• shall cherish and advance 
him in My faith and love and worship, receives Me. But whoso 
shall offend one of these little ones, that is, shall by wicked word or 
example turn him from My love and worship, it would be better for 
him that he were drowned in the sea. 

It were belief for him , i.e., as Luke has it (xviL 2), “It were 
better tor him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he 
cast into the sea, than that he should offend one of these little ones. It 
were better to be sunk in the sea than to scandalize little ones upon 
earth, because drowning is the death of the body, but causing 
a scandal is the death of the soul, both your own and the 
the souls of those whom you cause to stumble, and lead into sin. 
S. Matthew leaves out the second part of the antithesis, which Luke 
expresses in the words, than that he should offend one of these little ones. 
S. Jerome gives a different turn. “ It is better for him,” he says, 
“ to receive a short punishment for a fault, than to be reserved for 
eternal torments : for the Lord will not punish twice for the same 
offence.” 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



ON SCANDALS. 


287 


You will ask how this verse is connected with what precedes, and 
how this offence applies to the Apostles ? S. Jerome replies, “ Al- 
though this sentence may be taken as generally applicable against 
all who cause any one to stumble, nevertheless according to the 
sequence of the words, it can even be understood as spoken 
against the Aposdes, who by asking which was the greatest in the 
kingdom of Heaven, seemed to contend among themselves about 
pre-eminence. And if they remained in this fault, they might 
destroy those whom they were inviting to the faith, by giving them 
cause of offence, when they saw the Apostles fighting among them- 
selves about dignity. And when He says, it were better for him that 
a very heavy millstone were hung about his neck, He is speaking 
according to the custom of the country : for this was a method of 
punishing very great criminals amongst the ancient Jews, that a 
heavy stone should be tied to them, and that they should be sunk 
in a deep place.” 

Millstone (Vulg. mola asinaria; Gr. /ivXoc ovikoq.) This is a mill- 
stone which in Palestine, say SS. Hilary and Ambrose, is turned by 
asses. Whence the Syriac translates, the millstone of an ass . It 
means a large and heavy millstone, which could not be turned by a 
man, but which would require a horse or an ass to turn it Or it 
may mean the nether millstone upon which the upper millstone 
revolves. This nether millstone is called in Greek ovoc, an ass , 
because it sustains the weight and burden of the upper millstone. 
Thus, too, the Hebrews call the upper stone 2D recheb , a horseman , 
because it rides, as it were, upon the nether stone. 

Let the clergy and religious, who contend for pre-eminence among 
themselves, take note of this passage. For such contention causes 
seculars to stumble, and is a great disgrace and cause of reproach to 
religion. And it were better for them that they should be sunk 
with a millstone in the depths of the sea than that they should give 
cause of scandal to Christian people. 

Woe to the world , &c. ; that is, great and dreadful evils, both pre- 
sent and future, impend over men of the world, on account of God's 
wrath because of scandals, active as well as passive. For they who 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


288 


S. MATTHEW, XVIII. 


cause others to stumble by their ambition, or by the example of their 
evil life, are guilty of the punishment of hell And they who are 
scandalized, and follow the evil examples of others, are condemned as 
their followers and associates, and both alike perish. The world is 
full of scandals, because it is full of wicked men, libertines, spend- 
thrifts, and avaricious people. In order that they may satisfy their 
lusts, they cause all to stumble. Wherefore the larger part of man- 
kind is damned because of scandals. Wherefore it follows, it must 
needs be, &c. Moreover, scandals, or offences — of which Christ is 
here speaking — are persecutions, derision, injuries of the righteous ; 
also evil examples, false doctrines, things done or said unseasonably ; 
for there are many things which are good and lawful in themselves, 
but by reason of inopportuneness of time, or place, when they are 
done before the uninstructed, become an occasion of scandal. 

It must needs be, &c. Not absolutely, nor per se, but by supposi- 
tion. For the various dispositions and corruptions of so many men 
being foreseen and presupposed ; together with their levity, ambition, 
cupidity, forasmuch as they are free to be wicked, it is not possible 
but that sometimes by some, yea frequently by many, there should 
be (at least indeterminately, and in the gross) scandals, i.e., crimes, 
and other things which cause the little ones to stumble. So S. Paul 
says (i Cor. xi. 38) : There must be heresies . Thus it is necessary in 
genere, and in the gross, that a just man should commit venial sin 
sometimes ; although the particular acts of each individual are free, 
not absolutely determined. Therefore, any individual may avoid 
venial sins, considered one by one, but not all venial sins altogether. 
For let us grant that in individual cases a man may give such care 
and attention as not to sin, yet it is impossible that— taking all con- 
tingent events in the lump— a man should not sometimes be remiss, 
and fail, or slip. For this is the infirmity of the mind of man since 
the Fall. In the same way it is necessary that the most skilful 
archer, who to a certainty hits the mark as often as he chooses 
to do so, should sometimes miss it, if he is perpetually shooting at 
it. For this is a condition and result of human weakness — that 
mind, hand, or eye cannot long keep up the strain of their attention, 


Digitized by 


Google 



GUARDIAN ANGELS. 289 

that a man should hit the mark a hundred times running. He 
must miss sometimes. 

But woe to that man , &c. Because he determinate^, and of free 
will, in this or that wicked or indiscreet action gives an offence to 
the little ones, and so sins mortally. SS. Jerome and Bede apply 
these words to Judas, who gave the greatest scandal to the whole 
world, when he betrayed Christ But the words are of general appli- 
cation, and threaten the woe of eternal damnation to all who are a 
cause of offence. Christ here teaches three things concerning 
scandals : i. How grave they are in themselves and in their con- 
sequences. 2. How numerous they are, and that they must needs 
come ; speaking generally. 3. How carefully they are to be avoided. 
Wherefore He subjoins. 

But if thy handy &c. (verses 8 and 9), as I have expounded on 
chapter v. 30. 

Take heed, &c., viz., those who are lowly, whom the world 
despises as poor and miserable. For although they may be weak, 
yet have they guardian angels who are strong, who may accuse you 
to God the Father, whom they always behold, and by His command 
may severely avenge and punish all offences and wrongs done to 
those who have been committed to their charge. 

For I say unto you, & c. From this passage, and from Gen. xlviiL, 
16, and Acts xii., 15, and from the general tradition of the Fathers, 
doctors teach that all Christians, yea indeed all men, have an angel 
who is appointed by God to be their guardian from birth unto death. 
Hear S. Jerome “ Great is the dignity of souls, that each has from 
his birth an angel appointed to watch over him.” And again, “ The 
angels offer daily, through Christ, the prayers of those who are to bf 
saved. It is therefore a perilous thing to despise one whose desires 
are carried to the eternal and invisible God by the ministry of angels.” 
AD the rest of the Ancients, and even the Protestant doctors, teach 
the same thing. Suarez cites them (lib. 6 de Angelis, c. 17, n. 8). He 
shews in opposition to Calvin and the Centuriators that it is an error 
to deny that a guardian angel is given by God to aU men, not only 
to believers and the righteous, as Origen seems to have supposed, 
VOL. IL U 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


290 


S. <4 ATT HEW, XVIII. 


but even to unbelievers and the reprobate. Wherefore Antichrist 
will have his guardian angel, as S. Thomas teaches (1 part, quoest 
1 13, art 4, ad. 3). Suarez teaches the same, and that guardian 
angels are ordinarily of the ninth, or lowest order of the angelic 
hierarchy, who are designated by the common appellation of angels. 
But to some special individuals of surpassing excellence or dignity, 
as Apostles, Prophets, Patriarchs, Bishops, Kings, guardians have 
been assigned of the eighth order, who are called archangels. Hence 
Gabriel was the guardian of the Blessed Virgin, and he is thought by 
many to belong to the order of the Seraphim. In saying that all 
men have a guardian angel, I except Christ, for He needed not an 
angel, whose Divinity was a sufficient guardian of His humanity. 
Nevertheless Christ had many angels always at hand to minister to 
His wants. On this subject we must read Origen with caution, who 
pretends that guardian angels sometimes sin through negligence in 
their guardianship, and therefore are deprived for a time of the 
vision of God. But this is an error, for all the angels are blessed, 
and therefore immutable and impeccable. 

The offices of the guardian angels are as follows 2 — 1. To avert 
dangers both of the body and the souL 2. To illuminate and instruct 
those committed to their charge, and to urge them to good works. 
3. To restrain the demon, that he may not suggest wicked thoughts, 
or furnish occasions of sin. 4. To offer to God the prayers of him 
whom he guards. 5. To pray for him. 6. To correct him if he sin. 
7. To stand by him at the hour of death, to comfort and assist him 
in his last struggle. 8. After death to convey the soul to Heaven, or 
if it need purgatory, to accompany it thither, and when there to con- 
sole it from time to time, until purgatory being over, he carries it to 
Heaven. 

You will ask why the expression their angels connotes not only the 
little ones who believe in Christ, which is the direct antecedent, but 
all other men? S. Chrysostom replies that angels denote not any 
angels, but those of surpassing dignity, as though the care of the 
little ones were committed to the highest angels. S. Thomas inter- 
prets the highest angels to mean not the chief of the highest order 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



GUARD THE LITTLE ONES. 


291 


the Seraphim, but the chief of the ninth order of angels, so that the 
highest angels in that order are the guardians of men ; those in the 
middle ranks, of animals ; and the lowest, the guardians of trees and 
plants. To this we may add the opinion of Maldonatus, who thinks 
that the guardians of little ones are higher in rank than those of 
other men. And by little ones he understands not children, but the 
humble and the righteous, for whom God has greater care than for 
other men, as the whole of Scripture testifies. He proves that the 
angels of the little ones are greater and more honourable for this 
reason, that they always behold the face of God. Not that the other 
angels do not see It, but because by this expression the Hebrews 
signify one who is near to God, and His friend. It is a metaphor 
taken from courts, where the most honourable are those who are 
nearest to the king, and therefore most frequently see His face. 
Thus the Queen of Sheba says of the servants of Solomon, “ Blessed 
are these thy servants, who stand before thee, and hear thy wisdom." 

2. Their angels , denotes that the angels of little ones have special 
care of them, more than the angels of those who are grown up. Of 
little ones , I say, both those who arc so in age and faith, as well 
as in their lot and condition. For these, since they are weak in 
judgment and prudence, have the greater need of the care and 
guardianship of angels. It is a saying of the common people, that 
infants and idiots are the chief objects of angels* care, for truly, 
unless angels had special care of infants, they would continually fall 
into the fire or water, and would be injured by pigs and beasts, and 
run over by horses and carriages. 

3. Their angels, means that they are the peculiar friends of the 
little ones. For the angels marvellously love little children and the 
humble, because they, as it were, belong to them, and are most like 
them. For the angels are very humble, and by their humility they 
overcame Lucifer, saying, with S. Michael, their captain, mi ca el, 
Le., who is as God ? (See Philip Berlemont, in the Paradise for 
Children). 

Moraliter : Learn from hence, first, how great is the dignity of 
souls, that they have angels for their guardians. In the next place 

u a 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


29* 


S. MATTHEW, XVIII. 


how great is the condescension of God, that he assigns to us such 
guides. For these are they of whom it is said in Psalm civ., “Who 
maketh His angels spirits, His ministers a flaming fire.” In the 
last place, how great is the humility and love of the angels, who do 
not disdain these offices, but delight in them, because they see 
their Lord and God made man, as S. Bernard says. Wherefore 
the same S. Bernard says, on the words of the Psalm, He shall give 
His angels charge over thee , to keep thee in all thy ways , “What 
reverence ought these words to instil into thee, what devotion, 
what confidence. Reverence for the angel’s presence, devotion 
for his kindness, confidence for his guardianship. Walk warily, 
even as one to whom angels are present, in all thy ways. 
Whithersoever thou turaest aside, in whatever comer thou art, 
reverence thy angel. Do not dare to do in his presence what 
thou wouldst not dare to do if I saw thee.” 

Again, since the angels make it their business to purify, illuminate 
and perfect us, it is right that we should obey them by striving with 
all our might to attain to great sanctity and perfection, that we 
should emulate the life and habits of the angels, as those who are 
to be by and bye their companions in Heaven, for as the Apostle 
says, “ Ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow citizens 
with the saints, and of the household of God” And, “ Ye are come 
unto the city of the living God, to an innumerable company of angels.” 
Wherefore let us put away far from us all filthiness of the flesh and 
spirit, and especially all pride and contention. Nothing so provokes 
the angels to indignation as quarrels and scandals, as Christ here 
teaches, for they are the very angels of peace and edification. 

In fine, let us often converse with our angels in spirit, as St. 
Bernard says, “ Have the angels, my brethren, for your friends, and 
often go to them in earnest thought and devout adoration, for they 
are always present to guard and comfort you.” 

Always behold, &c., that is, the shining essence of God The 
angels always see clearly without a veil, as it were face to face. The 
angels, says S. Augustine (lib. 9. de Civil, c. 22.), enjoy the immutable 
and ineffable beauty of God, with the holy love of Whom they bum : 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



ANGELS SEEK GOD'S GLORY ONLY. 


293 


they despise all lower things, and themselves among them, that they 
may enjoy wholly, because they are good, that Good, by which they 
are good. The face of God then is the beauty and the brightness 
of the Divinity, clearly manifesting Itself to the angels, and making 
them blessed ; for otherwise, strictly speaking, God has not a face, 
even as he has not a body. 

Which is in Heaven : S. Gregory (2 Moral, e. 2.), and S. Bernard 
(Serm. 5, de dedicat. Eccles.) observe that the angels, even when they 
go forth from Heaven, always behold the face of God. For they are 
blessed wheresoever they are ; therefore, wheresoever they are, they 
are said to be in Heaven. For where there is the vision and glory 
of God, there is Paradise and Heaven. Hence S. Gregory says, 
“ They both stand before God, and are sent ; because through this, 
that they have been circumscribed, they go forth ; and through this, 
that they are also present within, they never go away. And there- 
fore they always see the face of the Father, and yet come to us, 
because they go forth abroad to us in spiritual presence, and yet they 
keep themselves there by interior contemplation.” And a little 
before, " What can they be ignorant of in things that can be known, 
who know Him who knoweth all things ? * They are not therefore 
called away from the guardianship of the humble through desire of 
returning to God, because they never depart from God, but where- 
soever they are, they have Him present. They do all things, and 
guard the little ones in God, and for the sake of God. 

The Son . . . that which was lost Gr. to AiroXwXoc, even the 
whole human race, which was lost through Adam's sin. This is 
Christ's second reason why the little ones and the lowly must not be 
despised nor offended. As though Christ said — I, Who am the Son 
of God, make so great account of the little ones that for their sake 
I have stooped to the lowest depths of humility, and have come 
down from Heaven that I might assume their flesh. Wherefore their 
salvation has brought singular joy both to Me and to My Father, as 
will appear from the parable of the sheep, which I am about to sub- 
join. Take good heed therefore lest by your offences ye destroy 
those little ones whom I have redeemed at the expense of so much 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


*94 


S. MATTHEW, XVI IL 


toil and blood For if ye do, ye will make not only the angels, bat 
My Father and Myself your enemies. For I love the little ones even 
as My own children and My most intimate friends. They are My 
especial property, and if ye take them away from Me by causing them 
to offend, I will require it at your hand 

How think ye , &c. . . . doth He not leave the ninety-nine upon 
the mountains f (Vulg.) : Where they feed after their manner. 

This parable may be expounded and applied in these ways : — i. 
Generally, of angels and men. a. Particularly, of men only. 3. 
Specially, of the little ones alone. Many generally, by the ninety- 
nine sheep feeding upon the mountains understand the holy angels, 
who have the fruition of God in Heaven, who have never sinned 
By the hundredth sheep which went astray, they understand the 
whole human race which sinned in Adam, and which, that He might 
redeem, and bring it back into the way of salvation, Christ as it 
were left the angels, and came down from Heaven, and was made 
man. So S. Hilary, Theophylacl, Anselm, in this passage; S. 
Gregory (Horn. J4 in Evang.) ; Cyril ( Catech . 15); S. Ambrose (in 
Apolog. David , e. 5) ; Irenaeus (/. 3, c. 21) ; Origen (Horn. 2 in Genes.) ; 
and many others. Gather from hence how vast is the multitude of 
the angels, which as greatly exceeds the number of all the men who 
have been, or are, or ever will be, as ninety-nine exceeds one. 

You may say, These sheep are the sheep of the Son of man. 
But Christ, as man, fed not the angels, but men only. Yet Christ 
was not as yet man, when he came down to this world to seek the 
hundredth sheep, man. It is replied, The angels are the sheep of 
the Son of Man : 1, materially , because they are the sheep of the 
Son of God, who is also Son of Man. Whilst in the post-parable, not 
the Son of Man is spoken of, but God the Father, when it is said, It 
is not the will of your Father . . that one of these little ones should perish. 

1. Formaliter , also : For Christ qud man, is also the Saviour ol 
the angels, though not their Redeemer, as He is of men. For, for 
the angels He merited all grace and glory, *>., election, predestina- 
tion, vocation, all helps, stirring up, assisting, sufficing and efficacious: 
and lastly all merit and increase of grace and glory. Wherefore 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



CHRIST'S SHEEP. 


*95 


Christ is the meritorious cause of the grace and gloiy of the angels. 
And the angels, on their part had a lively faith in Christ Incarnate, 
and by that were justified. So Richardus, Albertus, Catherinus, 
Galatinus, and others, whom Suarez cites (3./. q. 19. disp. 42. sect. 

1.), although Paludanus, Durandus, Bonaventura, and Alensis think 
the contraiy, that Christ merited grace and glory for men alone, not 
for the angels. 

2. Particularly : By sheep , men only may be understood. For as 
a shepherd searches after a single stray sheep, and is glad when he 
finds it, so Christ sought the whole human race, and rejoiced when 
He brought it back. 

3. This parable is of special application to the little ones, i.e., the 
poor, the despised, the ignorant, the simple, and the humble, who 
are small in wisdom, or wealth, or honour, or prudence. To them 
Christ applies the 14th verse ; and all that preceded had reference 
*0 the little ones. Wherefore He contrasts the one little sheep which 
went astray with the ninety-nine who went not astray, i.e., with those 
who are great in wisdom, riches, or authority, or who esteem them- 
selves great For these are supposed to go astray and sin less. 
For little sheep, as lambs, forasmuch as they are simple and inex- 
perienced are more ready to go astray than older sheep, who are 
accustomed to look to and follow their companions and their shep- 
herd. The meaning is as follows : As a shepherd who has ninety- 
nine sheep, if the hundredth little one, being, say a lamb, wanders 
from the flock, the shepherd leaves the ninety-nine, and seeks the 
missing lamb. Thus Christ leaves those who through His grace are 
already great in faith and virtue, or who esteem themselves so, the 
number of whom is very great, to take care of themselves and each 
other. But if any one who is little in faith and prudence wander 
from the way of salvation, He seeks for him by Himself, by His 
angels, by His doctors and preachers, that He may bring him back 
into the way. For He has a singular and peculiar love and care for 
these little ones, forasmuch as they are forsaken by others, and left 
to themselves. This it is plain is the true sense of the parable from 
what has been now said, and because Christ, in repeating it in Luke 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


2$6 


S. MATTHEW, XVIIL 


xv. 4, so explains it ; except that by the ninety-nine sheep He under- 
stands the just, and by the one hundredth erring one he means the 
sinner. But here by the ninety-nine He means the great, and by 
the hundredth, the little ones. 

He rejoiccth more , &c. Habitually, the shepherd rejoices more over 
ninety-nine sheep (because of their number) than he does over one. 
Whence, if he were asked whether he would rather lose ninety-nine 
than the one which had gone astray, he would answer, By no means 
I would rather lose one than ninety-nine. Nevertheless, actually— 
and in this particular instance — he does rejoice more over the one 
which had gone astray, and is brought back into the way of salvation. 
This is so, because this return raises a new and immense gladness, 
and because it drives away the sorrow which had arisen at the loss. 
For the joy which suddenly succeeds to sorrow is the greatest ot 
all Roman history relates how a mother, who was grieving for the 
loss of her son, who was said to be slain at Cannae, when she 
unexpectedly beheld him alive, expired for joy. Thus if any city or 
province be converted from heresy or idolatry, we rejoice more on 
account of it, than over all other cities or provinces that are already 
converted. This is, as it were, a third reason, whereby Christ by a 
parable shews that the little ones must not be despised. 

Even so it is not the will, &c., that is, God does not wish, nor is it 
pleasing to Him that one of the little ones should perish. 

But if thy brother sin , Syriac, shall err \ in allusion to the wandering 
sheep, of which He had been speaking. Christ passes apprQpriately 
from little ones to sinners, because they are little, that is despised 
and abject For what is more worthless than sin and sinners ? As 
therefore He taught that the little ones who are offended must not 
be despised, so now He likewise teaches that sinners who offend and 
injure others must not be despised, nor must vengeance be inflicted 
upon them for the injuries they have done, but that they must be 
corrected in love, that they may be restored to God’s grace, and to 
salvation. Christ therefore gives this as the remedy by which scandals 
may be taken away, even by the correction of him who caused the 
scandal. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



CORRECTION OF OUR NEIGHBOURS. 


*97 


Sin against thee. Certain Protestants expound the words against thee 9 
to mean, thou alone knowing ; if any one sin secretly and privately, 
secretly correct him ; for the public sinner must be publicly corrected, 
as an example to others. But the words against thee , are no where 
taken as meaning, thou alone being conscious. And Luke explains 
it as against thee . For he says, (xvii. 3), If thy brother sin against 
thee, rebuke him, but if he repent, forgive him \ that, namely in which 
he has sinned against thee. This is the way in which S. Peter under- 
stood the expression, for he, having reference to these words of 
Christ, asks the question, how oft shall my brother sin against me 9 
Christ alludes to Leviticus xix. 17. “ Thou shalt not hate thy brother 
in thine heart, but openly rebuke him.” Meaning do not cherish 
secret hatred against thy neighbour who has injured thee, but tell 
him plainly and openly that thou hast been wronged by him, that he 
may amend and make satisfaction to thyself and God by repentance. 
Whence Tertullian (/. 4, contra Marc. c. 35), understands this passage 
of Leviticus concerning brotherly correction, as if it had been com- 
manded to the Jews. 

You may say, then our neighbour is to be corrected only for sins 
against ourselves, not for those against God. I answer by denying 
the consequence, because Christ by synecdoche, speaking of injuries 
done to us, means to include all other sins. For there is the same, 
yea, a greater application to other sins. For if our neighbour is to be 
corrected for injuries done to us, much more for the offences by 
which he had offended God. We ought to love God better than 
ourselves : therefore we ought to ward off from Him their injuries, 
more than from ourselves. Christ however makes mention only of sin 
against ourselves, that He may put a bridle upon revenge, and substi- 
tute charity instead of it, and from charity brotherly correction. It 
is as though He said, if thy neighbour have offended or injured thee, 
do not make it publicly known or avenge it, but first reprove him 
lovingly and secretly. We must understand, if there be hope of 
amendment by such means, otherwise, omitting the private correction, 
we must proceed to correction in the presence of witnesses. But if 
;here be no hope from this, we must tell it to the Church, i.e. f to the 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



298 


S. MATTHEW, XVIII. 


pastor or the prelate. But if not even from this there be hope of 
amendment, this correction must be altogether omitted, and left to 
God. The reason is an & priori one. As charity obliges me to 
succour my neighbour when he is in any grave corporal necessity, so 
much more does it oblige me to succour him in any spiritual neces- 
sity, such as a state of sin and condemnation. Rightly argues Suarez, 
(2. 2. q. 33.) In addition to the hope of profit, in order that this 
precept may bind, it is necessary that my neighbour should stand in 
need of my correction. If for instance I am reasonably afraid that 
unless I correct him he will fall in the like sins. This is proved, 
because this is an affirmative precept of mercy. It is therefore only 
binding according to the rules of similar precepts ; therefore, only in a 
case of necessity. 

It may be asked whether this correction be a matter of precept, or 
of counsel only ? Again, whether it binds all the faithful, or priests 
and superiors only? 1. SS. Augustine, Chrysostom, Hilary, Basil, 
Theophylact, Bonaventura, and others, think that the correction of 
which Christ here speaks, has regard only to such as sin against us. 
As much as to say, Do not inflict vengeance upon him who has 
injured thee, but lovingly correct him ; and so this correction would 
be of precept rather than of counsel. Salmeron attempts to prove 
this view by many reasons, but what he says must be read with the 
greatest caution. For he might seem in his eleventh tractate to do 
away with this correction sanctioned by Christ altogether, and to find 
fault with it as useless, and often pernicious. But he does not 
express his own opinion, but that of others whom he cites, as he 
says expressly in the beginning of his eleventh chapter. Again he 
does not set aside the declaration of Christ, but the opinion of those 
scholastics and interpreters, who extend Christ's declaration to every 
kind of case whatsoever, who maintain that this mode of correction 
should be observed with respect to all sins, though Christ only 
enjoins it expressly with reference to the correction of those who sin 
against us. And Suarez himself shews that frequently this method 
cannot be observed, except to the detriment of the commonwealth, 
as clearly appears in a case of heresy, which creeps secretly like a 
cancel. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



HOW TO CORRECT, 


299 


2. Johannes Archias (in cap . Novit. de Judiciis), think that this 
correction is of precept to priests and prelates only; and of counsel 
to the laity. But this is too lax. 

3. Others think that this correction is of precept to the neigh- 
bours only, since it would be incongruous that a man who is guilty of 
the same, or a similar fault, should reprove another for that fault. 
Abulensis seems to favour this opinion. But I say that the correction 
which is here enjoined by Christ is not merely of counsel, but of 
precept, and is binding upon all the faithful. For although Christ 
says in express words only that those who have sinned against us are 
to be corrected, yet by parity of reasoning He intended it to be 
extended to all sinners. So the interpreters and scholastics, with 
S. Thomas, passim (2. 2. quasi. 33). This is plain from the 
expression, thy brother. For brother denotes any Christian believer, 
and an equal rather than a superior. For although unbelievers are 
at times to be corrected, yet Christ is here speaking only of the 
faithful as belonging to Himself and subject to His Church. For 
infidels cannot be punished and excommunicated by the Chnrch, 
inasmuch as they do not belong to it 

The reason is h priori, because this precept of correction is, both 
as regards its substance, as well as its method and order, not so 
much a positive command ; and, according to the jus divinum, as of 
the jus natures, belonging naturally to charity and grace. For charity 
requires that we should bring back our neighbour when he sins into 
the way of salvation by correcting him ; and that we should have 
regard to his shame as well as his good name. For as S. Jerome 
says, “ If he lose shame and modesty, he will remain in sin.” For 
it is not public and judicial correction which is here treated of, 
which deals with the just punishment of offences committed against 
the commonwealth, but that private correction which tends to the 
salvation of our neighbour when he sins. This reason is urged by 
S. Augustine (Serm. 16, de Verb. Apost.) “ Rebuke thy neighbour, ** 
he says, “ between thee and him alone, for the sake of the correction, 
and sparing his shame. For perchance he may, through shame, begin 
to defend his sin ; and thus him, whom thou wishest to become 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


3oo 


& MATTHEW, XVIIL 


better, thou makest worse.” And again, “ Forget thine own injury, 
not thy brother’s fall, nor suffer him to perish through thy silence. If 
thou alone knowest his fault, and reprovest it before others, thou art 
not a corrector, but a betrayer/* 

Wherefore, in order that this correction, which of itself is an odious 
thing, may be fruitful and efficacious, two principal things are 
needed ; namely, charity and prudence, or discretion. Charity ; that 
he who sins may feel that the correction proceeds not from hatred, 
or pride, but from love and compassion. Prudence, that it may be 
done modestly and gently, and with such circumstances of time and 
place and manner, as that he who has sinned may receive it grate- 
fully, and may amend, according to the Apostle’s words, " Instruct 
in the spirit of meekness, &c.” (Gal. vi. i.) As S. Leo says (Epist 
84.), “ Let there be benevolence rather than severity uppermost in 
the corrector ; let there be more of exhortation than of fussiness ; 
more of love than of power.” 

Moreover so great is the need of mutual correction of faults 
that a certain holy father was wont to say that there was nothing 
so great a cause of ruin as the lack of brotherly correction, 
and the violation of the precept to avoid impurity. S. Augustine 
(/. 1. de Civit. Dei. c. 9.) testifies that because of the omission 
of this brotherly correction, the good as well as the bad in this 
world are afflicted with very grievous calamities. The Gloss says, 
he who sees his brother commit a sin, and keep silence, is equally 
in fault with him who does not forgive him who repents. The very 
elements teach us the benefit of this correction. For so fire chas- 
tises, and by burning purifies the air. The air by the blasts of winds 
chastises and purifies the water. In like manner so does the water 
the earth. There can be no Christian charity in any one unless he 
afford the medicine of correction to an erring brother. 

In the last place, ordinarily, brotherly correction is only of obliga- 
tion when the sin is mortal Although indeed Cajetan, Valentia and 
D. Soto, think we are under an obligation to correct when the sin is 
venial But this does not seem to be generally true, nor is it usual 
in practice, unless grave loss or scandal follow from the venial sin. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


THIRD STAGE OF CORRECTION. 


301 

For otherwise the burden of correcting every single trifling fault and, 
being corrected for them, would be equally intolerable both to the 
corrector and the corrected : Indeed it would be morally impossible. 
(See Suarez 2 . 2 . tract . de charitate, disp. 8. sect. 2). 

If he shall hear thee , &c. Thou hast saved him who was ready to 
perish, and hast gained for God and heaven, him who was in danger of 
hell; yea thou hast gained him for thyself, because both thou and he 
had suffered loss from discord, as S. Chrysostom says. “ By the salva- 
tion of another, salvation is gained for ourselves also, ,, says S. Jerome. 

But if he will not hear thee &c. Christ orders that if the person 
corrected reject a secret admonition, he must be corrected in the 
presence of one or two others, and this for two reasons. The first 
is that he who is not ashamed in the presence of one may be 
ashamed in the presence of a greater number, and that several 
witnesses may the more easily and effectually convince him of sin, 
and persuade him to amend. 

But if He will not hear them, &c. This is the third stage to be 
observed in the order of correction, that those who are unwilling to 
listen to him who admonishes them, nor yet to the witnesses, may be 
brought before the Church, that is to a pastor and superior, or a 
prelate, as to a spiritual father and a judge, that he may paternally, 
but with greater authority, correct the sin, and so bring about amend- 
ment But that if the sinner will not be reformed, he may as a judge 
cut him off from the company of the faithful. Five acts, says 
Suarez, are to be noted in this order of correction, as given by 
S. Matthew. The 1st is private admonition: Tell him his fault 
between thee and him alone . 2. Correction, before one or two wit - 

nesses. 3. Denunciation : Tell it to the Church . 4. The rebuke of 
the prelate, if he will not hear the Church. 5. Coercion by means 
of excommunication : let him be to thee as a heathen. 

For various reasons this order may be omitted, or inverted. And 
there are times when it is right that he who has sinned should be 
immediately brought to a superior, as Salmeron shews upon this 
passage. The first of such cases is when the sin is public, so that 
it is impossible by means of secret admonition to preserve the good 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


30* 


S. MATTHEW, XVIII. 


name of the offender. 2. When the sin is against a third person, or 
the commonwealth, such as heresy, which eats like a cancer, and 
which ought therefore to be at once repressed with the utmost rigour 
by the pastor and bishop. 3. If it be evident that private monition, 
or before witnesses will be of no avail For as Adrian says, “ To 
strive in vain, and to labour for no other end than to gain hatred, is 
a mark of the utmost folly.” 4. If he who is corrected waives his 
right, and is content that his transgression be straightway laid before 
the superior. As it is in the Society of Jesus, those who enter it 
are expressly asked about this matter, whether they be willing that it 
shall be so. Among the Jesuits therefore, and other similar religious 
orders, a different method of correction is prescribed, namely that 
the case shall be immediately taken before the Superior, for this rule 
is set before the religious at their entrance. They waive this particular 
right of caring for their reputation. No wrong therefore is done them. 

The first reason is because it is expedient for the general good, 
lest the sin should infect others, and that the superior should take 
immediate steps to guard against it. 2. Because Religion is the 
school of humility and mortification, and of contempt of honour 
and reputation. 3. Because Religious are brethren. And he who 
corrects seems to set himself up as the superior of him who is 
corrected. Hence, our rule commands that no one shall reprove 
another. S. Augustine ( Epist . 109), in his rules for monks, ordains 
that if a monk shall see another casting a wanton glance, he shall 
admonish him privately — if he repeat the glance, he shall tell it to 
the superior. S. Basil has a similar rule {Reg. 46). Rashly, there 
fore, have some persons carped at this rule of religious orders. 
For these statutes have been approved by the Apostolic See. The 
statutes of the Dominicans have a similar provision. So S. Thomas, 
Richard, Angelus, Salmeron, Suarez, and others. Vide Suarez {tom. 
4, de relig. cap. 7), where he adds that in the Society of Jesus and 
other religious orders, this rule of Christ is observed wherever there 
is any certain hope that secret correction will produce amendment 
Moreover, in episcopal and abbatial visitations a different order is 
observed. For then it is ordered, on pain oi censure, that sins 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



MEANING OF, “TELL THE CHURCH.” 303 

shall be denounced. But bishops and abbots proceed not according 
to the method of fraternal correction, but of judicial enquiry. And 
of this Christ says nothing in this place. 

Lastly, let the three following canons be noted, for if they be 
observed, nothing will be done amiss as regards brotherly correction. 

1. Let the general good — that is, of the state, or the community — 
overweigh everything else; and, therefore, individual advantage. 

2 . Let the good of the soul, and the salvation of our neighbour, 
take precedence of the care of his reputation. 3. Always consider 
your neighbour's reputation, as far as is consistent with the general 
good, and the salvation of his souL 

Tell it to the Church: that is, to the pastor who presides over 
your own Church. You ask, What is here meant by the Church f 
SS. Jerome and Anselm in this passage, and S. Gregory (lib. 4, 
Epist. 38) understand the company of the faithful; a6 if Christ 
here intended that an offender should be reproved before them, and 
put to shame, and so corrected. Zwinglius and the Protestants follow 
this with avidity, that they may find a sanction for their democratic 
and popular form of Church government. Whence Castalini pro- 
fanely translates tell the Church , tell the republic. Others render, tell 
the community. But S. Chrysostom, Theophylact, Euthymius, and 
others (passim ) understand by Church the pastors and prelates of 
the Church, who represent the Church (either individually or in 
Synod) as magistrates represent a republic, and a king a kingdom. 
This is proved — 1. Because Christ here orders the Church to be 
heard, i.e. t obeyed by him who is accused ; otherwise he is to be 
accounted as a heathen. But this obedience is only rendered to the 
prelates of the Church, as is plain; yea, this reason persuaded 
Calvin to agree with our opinion. 2. Because Christ — explaining what 
is meant by the Church — subjoins, whatsoever ye shall bind ; as if to 
say, Ye, O ye Apostles, as princes of the Church, and those who shall 
succeed you as bishops and pastors. 3. Because the universal custom 
of the Church has been that such a one should be brought to 
Pastors, Bishops, the Pope, or a General Council ; not before the 
people. 4. Because to do otherwise would be contrary to the law of 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


304 


S. MATTHEW, XVIII. 


nature and a grievous wrong to our neighbour. It would be to 
defame him, if his crime were a secret one. Those Calvinists there- 
fore who denounce the crimes of their adulterous members and other 
sinners publicly in the Church, as though Christ here commanded it, 
offend grievously, and sin against charity. The true meaning is, if a 
brother, when reproved, will not hearken to him who corrects him 
in private, or even before two or three witnesses, let him be brought 
to the Prelate, who as Rector represents the Church, that he who 
despises private persons, may at least reverence the Prelate, and give 
heed to his correction. But if he will not, that then the Prelate, 
who not only has the office of private correction, but has the care 
of the whole Church, may provide that the wickedness of him who is 
reproved may not affect the whole body ; but that he may separate 
him as a diseased sheep from the rest of the flock, and may excom- 
municate and expel him. Hence it is plain against the same 
Protestants that the Church is visible, forasmuch as it ought to be 
approached by him who corrects, and seen and obeyed by him who 
is corrected. 

You may say, If, then, the prelates themselves, and especially if 
the Pope sity he ought in like manner to be brought before a general 
council, and therefore the Pope is subject to it, and consequently the 
government of the church is aristocratic — not monarchical. So 
Abulensis (qucest. 108), Panormitanus, Gerson, Almain, and others, 
who, in accordance with this opinion, deposed Pope Eugenius IV., 
in the Council of Basle. But this rash act of theirs was shortly 
afterwards annulled and repudiated by the Council of Florence. 

I reply, therefore, by denying the consequence, as far as the Pope 
is concerned. For if Bishops sin they must be brought before 
the Pope, that they may be corrected by him. For the rule of 
which we have been speaking does not apply to the Pope, but 
to all others who have superiors. But the Pope has no superior 
upon earth— not even the Church, or a general council For he is 
the head of the whole Church, as the perpetual usage and con- 
sent of the Church holds with the Lateran Council under Leo X. 
(Sess. n). This is why it was once declared by acclamation in a 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



PRELATES REPRESENT THE CHURCH. 305 

council of one hundred and eighty Bishops at Sinuessa to Pope S. 
Marcellinus, when he repented after a fall “ Thou judgest thyself by 
thine own mouth : it is not our judgment, for the chief See is judged 
by none.” S. Damasus is the authority for this, and Platina in his 
Life. The Pope is greater in the Church than a king in his kingdom. 
For a king receives his power from the state, but the Pope receives 
his power not from the Church, but directly from Christ. Wherefore, 
under no circumstances can he be deposed by the Church, but can 
only be declared to have fallen from his Pontificate, if, for the sake 
of example, he should chance (which God forbid) to fall into public 
heresy, and should therefore, ipso facto, cease to be Pope, yea, to be a 
Christian believer. 

But if he will not hear , &c. For he who despises the Prelate of 
the Church giving him admonition, despises the Church of which he 
is a ruler, and shows thereby that he will not be a son and citizen 
of the Church. Wherefore he must be accounted not a faithful 
Christian, but a heathen and a publican, that is to say, a public sinner. 

Again, let him be as a heathen , implies that you must not eat with 
him, nor greet him (i Cor . v. n, and 2 John, verse 10), that he may 
be confounded by the disgrace, and acknowledge his fault, and 
return to the Church. For excommunication is pronounced against 
a sinner, not to cause him to perish, but in order that he may amend. 

Verily I say unto you, &c. Christ here explains what His Church 
is, and its power and authority ; viz., that by the Church, Apostles and 
Prelates are meant, to whom He has given the power of binding 
and loosing both from sins and from excommunication, so that 
whomsoever they shall absolve from their sins on earth, God will 
absolve in Heaven : and whomsoever they, by excommunication 
shall eject from the company of the faithful, God will blot out 
his name from the Book of Life, and from the number of the 
blessed. 

Whatsoever ye shall bind : Origen, Theophylact, and Anastasius of 
Nice (q . 74) think that these words likewise pertain to the precept 
about correction, and therefore apply to all Christians. They explain 
as follows : — To whatsoever penitents you, O ye faithful, remit any 
VOL. il x 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


A 


8. MATTHEW, XVIIL 


306 

offence which they have committed against you, God will remit it to 
them in heaven : but to those to whom ye do not remit, neither will 
God remit it to them. But this is an explanation which cannot be 
upheld. This is plain from the following consideration, that Christ 
speaks of the Church in opposition to private sinners, and those who 
correct them. Therefore by the Church He means her Prelates, and 
not the faithful generally. Again, because He assigns judgment and 
a tribunal to the Church, (and this belongs only to Prelates) to which 
obedience ought to be rendered, on pain of being considered a 
heathen, and afterwards refers to that judgment of the Church this 
general power of binding and loosing, both internal, in faro am- 
scientist, and external, in foro exiemo , by excommunication, the 
opinion of Origen cannot be correct For the sinner is brought to 
the Pastor of the Church, that he may be moved to repentance and 
confession, and so be absolved from his sin, and be justified and 
reformed, but if not that he may be excommunicated. So SS. 
Chrysostom, Hilary, Augustine, and others, passim . Wherefore 

theologians rightly gather and prove from this passage, the power of 
excommunication, as well as the sacrament of penance after the 
method of judgment and absolution. The Emperor Theodosius 
understood this, when being expelled from the Church by S. Ambrose 
because of his slaughter of the Thessalonians, he made his moan, 
“ Even to slaves and beggars there is access to the temple of God, 
but I am shut out. For I know the Lord hath said, 1 Whatsoever 
ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven.’ * Wherefore as a 
suppliant, he asked for absolution from S. Ambrose. This he 
obtained, and fulfilled the penance which he enjoined upon him. 
The Council of Basle take note from S. Thomas that there are three 
kinds of binding and loosing recognised by Catholics. The first is 
of authority, which belongs to God alone. The second of excellency, 
which is peculiar to Christ The third, which has been granted by 
Christ to priests alone. Moreover this power of binding and loosing 
is a very ample one, and embraces various particulars, as I have 
shown in chapter xvL 19. 

Observe here the beautiful order of Christ’s discourse. In the 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



AGREEMENT IN PRAYER. 


307 


beginning of the chapter, when the Apostles were disputing about 
precedence, He puts the humility of the little ones, as it were a 
bridle upon them : and warns them lest by their ambition they offend 
the simple folk, and those who are as yet feeble in the faith of Christ 
Then in verse 15, He gives a remedy against scandal, brotherly 
correction ; and He says all these things to the Apostles, as represent- 
ing all the faithful. Then because He gives as the final stage of 
correction, that the Church must be told, that is to say, the Prelate 
of the Church, He intimates what His authority is, by saying, what- 
soever ye shall bind on earth , &c. For this power of binding and 
loosing appertains to Prelates, not to the rest of the faithful 

Again I say unto you, &c. The connection of these words with 
what precedes is difficult to be traced. Therefore it has been taken 
in various ways. 1. Some are of opinion that the words refer to the 
two witnesses , of whom Christ speaks in verse 16. Then the Gloss 
expounds, if two of you shall agree upon earth either in receiving one 
who is repentant, or in rejecting one who is proud, or about any other 
matter, about which they shall ask, it shall be done for them by My 
Father in Heaven. 

a. Jansen draws out the connection thus — If two shall ask any- 
thing of God, He will grant it : how much more therefore will He 
ratify the judgment of the Church in binding and loosing? And 
Maldonatus thus — “ In order that ye may not err in the judgment of 
binding and loosing, let prayer precede it For if ye judge in My 
Name, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in My Name, ye shall 
obtain.” 3. Francis Lucas thus — To you, O ye Apostles, not only 
do I give the power of binding and loosing, but another great gift as 
well. It is that if two of you agree to ask anything of God, ye shall 
obtain it 4. Clearly and correctly, SS. Jerome, Hilary, Chrysostom, 
refer the words to the advantage of unity, of which He makes men- 
tion, verse 15 : for the sake of which He instituted the precept of 
fraternal correction. It is as though Christ said, I have ordained 
that if any one sin against thee, thou shalt not pursue him with 
hatred, but shalt kindly correct him, with this end in view, that if 
two of you, especially if ye have been previously at enmity, or dis- 

x 2 




Digitized by v^,ooQle 



308 


8 . MATTHEW, XVIIL 


agreement, should agree together, and unitedly ask anything of God, 
they may obtain it Hear S. Jerome, “Christ’s entire preceding 
discourse had invited to concord ; and now He makes a promise of 
a reward, that we may with eagerness hasten unto peace. For He 
says that He will be in the midst of two, or three. Thus the Apostles 
persevering in prayer with one accord, obtained the Holy Ghost at 
Pentecost” (Acts i. 14.) 

If two : S. Chrysostom and Euthymius restrict this promise to the 
Apostles. Anastasius to the corrector and the corrected. Origen, 
to a husband and wife, that if they agree to abstain from the use of 
matrimony, that they may give themselves to prayer, they shall obtain 
whatever they ask. But I say that the words refer to all faithful 
Christians, for to them Christ was speaking in the persons of the 
Apostles, who alone were present 

Concerning anything, \ any proper thing, whether it be small or greats 
whether easy or difficult Only you will understand that they must 
ask faithfully, hopefully, humbly and perseveringly : also that the thing 
asked for is expedient for them. For if it be not expedient, God 
will not give them what they ask, but something else which is far 
better and more profitable for them. 

In My Name, i.e., for My sake; in respect of Me ; for My sake 
and My love, seeking nothing but Me and My glory. 

There am I, &c., t.e., there I stand, and co-operate, and guide their 
desires and prayers, and fulfil them. I am in the midst of them, as 
the Holy Ghost is in the midst of the Father and the Son, as it were 
the love and bond of both. S. Hilary gives the reason, “ Because 
He who is peace and love will make his dwelling-place with good and 
peaceful dispositions.” And Origen says, we often fail to be heard of 
God, because we disagree among ourselves, and he gives the cause. 
“ As in music, unless there be harmony and concord between the 
sounds, the hearer is not gratified. So is it with the Church ; unless 
there be agreement, God does not delight in it, nor listen to its voice.” 

Some writers, arguing from the major to the minor, prove, not 
inaptly, the authority of Councils. For the declaration is a general 
one, and has proportionally greater force as respects Councils, than 


Digitized by v^ooQle 


ON FORGIVENESS. 




as regards other things. For if Christ be in the midst of two, much 
more must He be in the midst of the whole Church, gathered together 
in His Name, and represented by the Prelates and Bishops. For 
Councils are properly gathered together in the Name of Christ, *>., 
by His authority, that they may increase and propagate His faith and 
gloiy. Wherefore when they ask in the Name of Christ that they 
may not err in faith, that they may reform the manners of the 
faithful, that they may have the assistance of the Holy Spirit, they 
certainly obtain these things. This is especially true of (Ecumenical 
Councils, but it is applicable to Provincial Councils also, when they 
are legitimately constituted, and approved by the Pope. 

In Heaven. The Gloss says, By this He shows that God is above 
all things, and that He can fulfil what He is asked to do. Or, in 
Heaven may mean in the Saints , which is equivalent to saying, that 
whatever they ask shall be done for them, because they have Him 
with them, from Whom they ask. 

Then came Peter, &c. Peter was led to ask this question in conse- 
quence of what Luke (xvil 4) says Christ added upon this occasion. 
“ And if he trespass against thee seven times in a day, and seven 
times in a day turn again to thee, saying, I repent ; thou shalt forgive 
him.” Where seven times means the same as often, or indeed always, 
when thy brother repents. But Peter did not clearly understand 
whether seven times were to be taken definitely for the precise number 
seven, or whether it were to be taken indefinitely for as often as might 
be needed. He asks therefore Christ to explain His meaning, and 
to tell him exactly how often he was to forgive his brother his tres- 
passes. Peter's breast was narrow as yet, carnal, and bounded by 
the flesh. He could not understand the infinite abyss of mercy 
which there was in the Divine nature of Christ 

Jesus said unto him , &c. That is, times innumerable thou shalt 
forgive thy brother’s trespasses, if he repent This is what I meant 
when I said (as in Luke xvii. 4) Thou shalt forgive him seven times* 
By seven times I meant seventy times seven , that is always, times without 
number. So SS. Chrysostom and Augustine (Serm. 15 de Verb . Dom.). 
“ I dare to say that if he shall sin against thee seventy times eight* 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


3io 


S. MATTHEW, XVI II. 


thou shalt forgive him, or a hundred times eight For if Christ found 
a thousand sins and forgave all, withdraw not thou thy mercy. 
For the Apostle says, “ Forgiving one another, if any man have a 
quarrel against any; even as God, for Christ’s sake, hath forgiven you.” 

Symbolically , S. Gregory {lib. 32, Moral, cap . 12) teaches that 
eleven is the symbol of sin, because this number transgresses the 
number ot the Decalogue, ten. But seven is the symbol of totality, 
because in the seven first days of the world God created and set in 
order this whole universe. Again, in seven days, perpetually recur- 
ring, the whole of time is included. Seventy-seven is composed of 
eleven times seven. Therefore, seventy-seven signifies that all sins 
of every kind must be forgiven. This number, then, is the symbol 
of the plenary and perfect remission of all sins, whensoever a sinner 
repents. “ Christ,” says S. Hilary, u has an allusion to Lamech, 
who said, when confessing his homicide, * Vengeance shall be taken 
of Cain sevenfold ; but of Lamech, seventy times seven’” (Gen. iv. 24). 
See what I have there said. For as Lamech was punished, as it 
were, in seventy-seven generations, for as Josephus says, he had 
seventy-seven sons, who all perished in the deluge, so Christ our 
Saviour, by whom all sin is done away, was bom from seventy-seven 
generations. For in the genealogy of Christ, as given by S. Luke, 
from God and Adam unto Christ there are numbered, inclusively, 
seventy-seven generations. 

Moraliter : Learn from hence the breadth of the heart, and the 
abyss of the love of Christ, who wishes us to forgive our brother 
seventy times seven, that is, whenever he offends against us. For if 
he wills us weak men to have so great charity and liberality, what do 
we think must be the abyss of love which He hath in Himself? 
Appositely says S. Augustine, “ He sins once, I forgive. He sins a 
second and a third time, I forgive. He sins a fourth time : he must 
be chastised. Let us correct by words, and if need be, by stripes. 
But let us forgive the offence, let us put away the fault from our 
memory, that even though some discipline be imposed for love’s sake, 
gentleness may not depart out of our heart” This number will be 
far greater, if with Origen we take the words exactly. For Christ 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



VALUE OF THE TALENT. 


3*1 

said not, seventy times and seven times, but seventy times seven, 
that is to say four hundred and ninety; as it is clearly in the Greek, 
tffiojiTjKovTaicig hrra. So many times does Christ wish us to forgive a 
penitent his offences. According to this meaning there will be an 
allusion to the seventy weeks of Daniel For these make four hundred 
and ninety years which elapsed from the decree for rebuilding Jeru- 
salem unto Christ, by whom there is full remission of all sins. See 
what I have said on Daniel ix. 24. 

Therefore the kingdom of Heaven is likened, &c The scope and 
signification of this parable will become apparent from the post- 
parable, ver. 35. So likewise will your Heavenly Father do also unto you, 
tf ye from your hearts forgive not everyone his brother. This is the 
end in view of the parable, and the parts of it which pertain to this 
are to be referred to the thing signified. The other emblems are 
only for the adorning of the parable, having nothing to do with 
its signification, strictly speaking. Such mere emblems in this case 
are the command in ver. 25, for the sale of the wife and children ; 
and the accusation of the cruel servant by his fellow-servants (ver. 31). 
Again the scope of the parable is intimated by the word therefore, 
which has reference to the preceding verse. The force of it is as 
follows : “ That ye may know how pleasing it is to God, and how it 
has been enjoined by Him, that we shall forgive our brother who has 
trespassed against us just as often as he repents, I therefore subjoin 
a parable, in which I compare the kingdom of Heaven to a king 
taking account of his servants." 

And when he began , &c. An Attic talent was equivalent to six 
hundred golden crowns. Ten thousand talents therefore would make 
a stun of six million golden crowns, a vast, an immense sum, altogether 
beyond the ability of a poor man to pay. And this sum would be 
twenty times as much, if we take the value of a Hebrew talent as our 
standard, for it was worth three thousand shekels, or twelve thou- 
sand French crowns. Thus ten thousand talents would be equivalent to 
a hundred and twenty million French crowns. And as Christ was speak- 
ing not to Greeks but to Jews, He would speak of the Hebrew talent 
Consider then, that according to this parable, God requires of a sinner, 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



312 8. MATTHEW, XVIIL 

who has committed but one mortal sin, more than if a master should 
require of a poor slave more than a hundred and twenty million 
crowns. For a single mortal sin, forasmuch as it is committed against 
God, and as far as in it lies, robs God of His Deity, is a far greater 
injury to God than all injuries done to all kings could be. It is a 
far greater debt than all the debts of all mankind, which are owed 
by them to all other men. For as God is far above all men, 
yea though they seem infinite in number, so does an injury against 
God surpass all the injuries done to men, and contract an infinite 
guilt and debt of punishment Wherefore this vast amount of debt 
pertains rather to the thing signified, that is to say, mortal sin, than 
to the actual parable of the servant For what servant could con- 
tract a debt of one hundred and twenty millions, unless he stole the 
king's treasury, or destroyed, or betrayed a whole realm ? Moreover 
if one mortal sin be a debt of one hundred and twenty millions, of 
how many millions will his debt consist, who has committed a hun- 
dred, a thousand, yea many thousand mortal sins ? Now this suits 
the words seventy times seven. As though it were said — if God for- 
gives you so vast a multitude of sins, far more in comparison than 
ten thousand talents, much more ought we to forgive all the tres- 
passes of our neighbours, which are of far less consequence against 
us. Especially since God forgives us, upon this condition, our great 
faults, that we should forgive our neighbours their few and small faults. 
See Matthew vi. 14. The reason is an & priori one. Because God 
is infinite goodness, so also is sin an immeasurable evil From 
hence it follows that no mere creature can make any equivalent satis- 
faction for mortal sin. Yea not all the works of the saints can make 
compensation for even one sin. Therefore in order to make an 
equivalent satisfaction for sin it was necessary that the Son of God 
should become incarnate, and should suffer ; as the Fathers teach* 
Lastly : sin is rightly compared to a talent, because like a talent and 
weight of lead it sinks a man down to hell. 

Verse 25. When he had not \ &c. It was the law amongst various 
nations that if a debtor could not pay, his creditor might sell him 
with his wife and children, and pay himself with the price for which 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


THE HUNDRED PENCE. 


3 T 3 


they were sold. That this was the custom among the Jews is seen 
from 2 Kings iv. i., where the wife of a prophet who had died, said 
to Elisha, “ Behold the creditor is come to take unto him my two 
sons to be bondmen.” 

Mystically : S. Jerome, “ As the wife of the just man is called 
wisdom, so also the wife of the unjust and the sinner is called folly, 
whose children are evil thoughts.” 

Falling down , upon his knees, or his face : Besought him. Many 
Greek MSS. read, irapeicaXti, but the greater number with the Syriac 
have wpotriKvvei ahrw t worshipped him. The Arabic has, Be patient , 
and I will give thee what is thine. This servant, that he may escape 
the sale of himself and his family into slavery promises mountains of 
gold. “ O my master ! I will pay thee all I owe.” But this was 
impossible. But he would gain time, that through the delay he 
might employ the prayers of his friends to bend the mind of the king, 
whom he knew to be liberal and large-hearted, to forgive him the 
debt And in this he was not mistaken. Hence it follows : 

The Lord had compassion , &c. The things are spoken parabolically 
to show how pleasing to God are a humble confession of sin, and 
prayer for pardon. Again there is signified how infinite is God's 
mercy which immediately forgave this vast debt of sin to the servant 
who asked for it Here is the scope of the parable. It is d priori 
reasoning. Because God is essentially good and kind, therefore it is 
His uncreated and infinite goodness and kindness which does good 
to all, and pardons and spares all, just as it is the property of fire 
to give heat, and of the sun to give light Thus the Church prays, 
“ O God, whose nature and property it is to have mercy and to for- 
give, &c.” 

But the same servant ... a hundred pence. This would amount to 
about four pounds of English money. See here the narrowness and 
covetousness of the human breast as compared with the largeness 
and liberality of the heart of God. 

Verse 29. And his fellow servant, &c. He humbles himself 
before his fellow servant, and asks him to forgive him the hundred 
pence, in the self-same words with which that fellow servant had 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



3i4 


$. MATTHEW, XVIII. 


obtained from his master the remission of one hundred and twenty 
millions of crowns. But it was all in vain. 

But he would not , &c. Greedily and rigidly does this servant 
stand upon his rights. And thus using them, he abused them, being 
unmindful of the mercy and clemency which the Lord had 
shewn to himself. Therefore he provoked the rigour of the 
justice of the same Lord against himself and in fact had to 
suffer it 

So when his fellow servants , &c. This has to do with the adorn- 
ment of the parable. For thus servants act in the houses of their 
masters, and in courts of princes. But this does not apply to the 
thing signified by this parable. For the saints and the blessed do not 
cany to God, or accuse the cruelty, or the sins of men, but rather 
excuse and cover them, and pray for them. 

Verses 32, 33. Then his Lord , &c., had pity on thee. Arab. 
according to my mercy towards thee. My mercy towards thee ought to 
have been the stimulus and the measure of the mercy which thou 
shouldst have shewn to thy fellow-servant Measure I say, not equal, 
but proportional For as I remitted ten thousand talents, it was thy 
duty to remit a hundred pence. 

Was wroth : Syriac, burnt with anger: the tormentors. It appears 
from history, and from the civil law of the Romans, to whom at that 
time the Jews were subject, that debtors were accustomed to be 
delivered by their creditors to tormentors, who cast them into prison, 
and scourged them. The Emperor Constantine L out of Christian 
benignity abolished the punishment of scourging debtors with scourges 
loaded with lead. Moreover, tormentors are demons, says Remigius, 
who torment souls of sinners in hell in a thousand ways. Until he 
should pay , u e. f he must be tormented for ever. For he could never 
pay that debt of ten thousand talents. So Chrysostom, Euthymius, 
Theophylact 

It may here be asked — Is then every fault and its penalty which 
has been remitted by God to a penitent sinner reimposed by Him 
on account of such ingratitude and mercilessness ? For that seems 
to be asserted in this parable. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



HOW THE DEBT OF StN RETURNS. 


3*5 

I say, i. This parable is true in foro huntano , juridically, and in a 
parabolic manner, especially because civil right granted to a donee 
may be rescinded by the donor on account of ingratitude. For so 
great would be the feeling among men with respect to the pride and 
cruelty of the wicked servant of the parable, that every one would 
think he deserved to pay and atone for his former debts and sins, not 
as though what had been forgiven revived, but because they were all 
virtually included in his subsequent cruelty. And thus we see 
princes inflict punishment upon those who had offended them, and 
whom they had afterwards spared, if they subsequently carry them- 
selves in an arrogant and ungrateful manner towards them. They 
exact the penalty of all their previous offences. Whence they 
are considered to have only conditionally pardoned them, the 
pre-supposed condition being that they shall amend, and be grateful, 
and carry themselves modestly. 

I say, 2. That all this does not find a counterpart in foro divino , 
and in the thing signified by the parable. For God does not reim- 
pose upon the sinner whom He has forgiven and who will not foigive 
his fellow men their trespasses against him, the sins which He has 
before foigiven. The reason is because God in His infinite clemency, 
forgives sins not conditionally, but absolutely and irrevocably to the 
penitent, according to the words, " The gifts and calling of God are 
without repentance.” Rom. xi. 29. Wherefore although the sinner 
who has been the object of pardoning grace, again fall into the same, 
or other sins, and will not forgive his neighbour, and thus proves 
himself ungrateful to God, yet does not the circumstance of this 
ingratitude so aggravate his sin, that on account of it all sins which 
have been already foigiven by God, are again imputed to him. For 
since God is the chief Goodness and Holiness, He cannot recall and 
set up afresh, sin which has once been done away. I may add that 
this ingratitude is not a peculiar sin, but only a general circumstance 
of all sin. General, I say, because in all and every sin there is a 
certain amount of ingratitude towards God. Wherefore in the court 
of the most good and merciful God this ingratitude does not 
aggravate the sin to which it is attached* in the same way that it 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



3*6 


S. MATTHEW, XVHt 


aggravates it at an earthly tribunal, among men. Wherefore the 
similitude and comparison of the parable are not to be sought for in 
this, but in the way in which Christ applies the parable in verse 35, 
viz., that God will not forgive the offences of those who do not for- 
give their neighbours, those offences I say, which they have in other 
ways contracted, or which they contract by their refusal to forgive 
others, or by their cruelty towards their neighbour. Wherefore sins 
which have been once forgiven by God are forgiven for ever, nor are 
they in any case recalled by God. So Theologians teach with S. 
Thomas, (3./. q . 88. art. 1 and$). 

I say 3, These things are true, but not sufficient They do not 
exhaust the whole scope and force of the parable. For in it it is 
expressly declared, And the lord was wroth, and delivered him to 
the tormentors until he should pay all the debt — that is to say, the 
ten thousand talents which had been already remitted. And it is 
subjoined, So also will My Heavenly Father do likewise unto you, tj 
ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses ; 
namely, He will recall all your past sins which have been already 
forgiven, even as the lord recalled the past debt of his servant 
which had been already remitted. 

This remitted debt, therefore, and sin is said to be recalled and 
to return, through that subsequent mercilessness and ingratitude. 
1. Because this want of mercy is a deadly sin ; for to be unwilling 
to forgive our neighbour a fault, is to cherish hatred, anger, and 
revenge against him, which is clearly mortal sin. And thus by this 
means the former state of sin and liability to hell returns. For he 
who will not forgive is a debtor to the wrath of God in the same 
way that he was previously, on account of other sins. For this sin 
is irremissible, because so long as a man will not forgive his neigh- 
bour for a trespass against himself, so long will not God forgive 
him his own faults. In this very way, therefore, that a similar new 
sin of mercilessness is committed, by means of it, in a kind of way, 
past offences against God seem to live again, because the state of 
sin and the liability to hell live again. 

2. Because this ingratitude is a great aggravation of sin, and that 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



INGRATITUDE AGGRAVATES SIN. 


317 


in a deadly manner, if we believe Soto (in 4 dist. 32, art. 3), who 
asserts that it must be mentioned by a penitent in confession. 
Others take a milder view — that the circumstance of ingratitude 
aggravates the sin to which it is attached, only venially. For this 
ingratitude attaches itself to all sin. Theologians teach that it 
is especially to be discerned and taken account of in four 
kinds of sins; namely, hatred, apostasy, obstinacy and impeni- 
tence. For these four are directly repugnant to the very essence 
of the remission of sins; that is to say, either to faith, or charity, or 
repentance. 

3. Although this ingratitude be not in itself mortal sin, yet it is 
often a cause of mortal sin. For God, on account of this ingratitude, 
withdraws the more plentiful supply of His grace from the sinner, 
and permits him to be more severely tempted by the flesh and the 
devil. Hence it comes to pass that he falls into more dreadful 
mortal sins, by which that former multitude of faults returns, which 
is signified by the ten thousand talents . God will require of him as 
much as the former debt amounted to, because of his want of mercy ; 
although the debt may be of other sins than those which had been 
remitted, that the words may be fulfilled, “ He shall have judgment 
without mercy, who hath shewed no mercy.” (James ii. 13.) 

Verse 35 : So also shall \ &c. From your hearts: from the very 
bottom of your heart For there are many who foigive with their 
lips, but not with their hearts. Christ, therefore, bids that the gall 
of rancour be cast out of the heart, and the honey of love substi- 
tuted in its place. This parable, therefore, teaches how dreadful it 
is to keep anger and revenge against our neighbours in our minds ; 
and, on the other hand, how pleasing it is to God to lay them aside, 
and convert them into love, even as God receives the penitent sinner 
to His grace and the bowels of His love, and buries in oblivion all 
his past offences, even as though they had never been committed. 
Moreover, not once, but seventy times seven — that is, always— must 
we foigive our neighbour who repents of the offence which he has 
committed against us. In order to show this, Christ spake the 
parable of the Ten Thousand Talents — that is, of a very vast debt 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


31 * 


S. MATTHEW, XVIII. 


Let us, therefore, who are but weak men, imitate God, who forgives 
us our daily offences against Him, and those very many and very 
grievous, as often as we repent And therefore He bids us pray 
daily, Foigive us our debts, even as we forgive them that are indebted 
to us. 


Digitized by Google 


CHAPTER XIX. 

i Christ healeth the sick : 3 answereth the Pharisees concerning divorcement : 
10 sheweth when marriage is necessary: 13 receiveth little children: 16 in- 
structeth the young man how to attain eternal life , 20 and haw to be perfect : 
23 telleth his disciples haw hard it is for a rich man to enter into the kingdom 
of God f 27 and promiseth reward to those that forsake anything to follow 
him . 

A ND it came to pass, that when Jesus had finished these sayings, he departed 
from Galilee, and came into the coasts of Judaea beyond Jordan ; 

2 And great multitudes followed him ; and he healed them there. 

3 U The Pharisees also came unto him, tempting him, and saying unto him, Is 
it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause ? 

4 And he answered and said unto them, Have ye not read, that he which made 
them at the beginning made them male and female, 

5 And said. For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall 
cleave to his wife : and they twain shall be one flesh? 

6 Wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore God hath 
joined together, let not man put asunder. 

7 They say unto him, Why did Moses then command to give a writing of 
divorcement, and to put her away ? 

8 He saith unto them, Moses because of the hardness of your hearts suffered 
you to put away your wives : but from the beginning it was not so. 

9 And I say unto you, Whosoever shall put away his wife, except it be for 
fornication, and shall marry another, committeth adultery : and whoso marrieth 
her which is put away doth commit adultery. 

10 H His disciples say unto him. If the case of the man be so with his wife, it 
is not good to marry. 

1 1 But he said unto them, All men cannot receive this saying, save they to 
whom it is given. 

12 For there are some eunuchs, which were so born from their mother’s womb s 
and there are some eunuchs, which were made eunuchs of men : and there be 
eunuchs, which have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven’s sake. 
He that is able to receive it, let him receive it. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



320 


S. MATTHEW, XIX. 


13 If Then were there brought unto him little children, that he should put his 
hands on them, and pray : and the disciples rebuked them. 

(4 But Jesus said, Suffer little children, and forbid them not, to come unto 
me : for of such is the kingdom of heaven. 

15 And he laid his hands on them, and departed thence. 

16 If And behold one came and said unto him, Good Master, what good thing 
shall I do, that I may have eternal life ? 

17 And he said unto him, Why callest thou me good? there is none good but 
one, that is, God : but if thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments. 

18 He saith unto him, Which? Jesus said, Thou shalt do no murder, Thou 
shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not steal. Thou shalt not bear false 
witness, 

19 Honour thy father and thy mother : and, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as 
thyself. 

20 The young man saith unto him, All these things have I kept from my youth 
up : what lack I yet ? 

21 Jesus said unto him, If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell that thou hast, and 
give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven : and come and follow 
me. 

' 22 But when the young man heard that saying, he went away sorrowful : for 
he had great possessions. 

23 II Then said Jesus unto his disciples, Verily I say unto you, That a rich 
man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven. 

24 And again I say unto you, It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of 
a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. 

25 When his disciples heard it, they were exceedingly amazed, saying, Who 
then can be saved ? 

26 But Jesus beheld them, and said unto them, With men this is impossible 5 
but with God all things are possible. 

27 If Then answered Peter and said unto him. Behold, we have forsaken all, 
and followed thee : what shall we have therefore ? 

28 And Jesus . said unto them, Verily I say unto you, That ye which have 
followed me, in the regeneration when the Son of Man shall sit in the throne of 
his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of 
Israel. 

29 And every one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, 
or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my name's sake, shall receive an 
hundredfold, and shall inherit everlasting life. 

30 But many that are first shall be last ; and the last shall be first 

And it came to pass , &c. This is the same history as that related 
by S. Mark (x. 1), by S. Luke (ix. 51), and, as it would seem, by S. 
John (vii. 1). So Jansen, Francis Lucas, and others. Maldonatus, 
however, denies this with respect to S. John : but his arguments will 
be refuted by the exposition of the context It is plain from John 
that these events took place about the Feast of Tabernacles, which 
was celebrated in September. Christ went up to that feast, that He 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



CHkIST CROSSES THE JORDAN. 


321 


might gradually prepare Himself for death. He was crucified in the 
following March. Luke adds, that Christ journeyed through Samaria. 
Hence it follows, that Christ — leaving the direct route from Samaria 
to Jerusalem — proceeded to the Jordan; and having crossed it, 
passed through Perea and entered the borders of Judea from the 
east, and arrived at Jerusalem about the middle of the Feast of 
Tabernacles, as John has (vii. 14). This explains the expression, 
beyond Jordan , in the text. Beyond, or across Jordan , must be con- 
nected with the verb came, not with the words coasts of Judea, as is 
plain from Mark. For Christ, about the borders of Judea, crossed 
over the Jordan, that He might be farther away from the observation 
of the Pharisees, when He was teaching and healing the multitudes. 

Great multitudes followed Him, &c. Not so much from Galilee — 
where He wished His journey to escape observation, as Mark and 
John say — as from the other districts through which He passed. 
He healed them there There — i.e., on the confines of Judea ; and 

then sent them back to their homes. For He did not wish to enter 
Jerusalem with so great a crowd of people, that He might not give 
the Pharisees an opportunity of accusing Him of sedition, and stirring 
up the people. 

The Pharisees also, &c. They had no doubt (from Deut. xxiv. 1) 
that this was allowable for any grave cause. So Origen, SS. Jerome 
and Bede. Came, not when Jesus proceeded from the confines of 
Judea to Jerusalem to keep the Feast of Tabernacles (see John vii. 1), 
but after the feast was over, and He was returning to the b orders of 
Judea and had again crossed the Jordan. This is plain from John 
x. 40 ; for Matthew passes over in silence both the going to Jeru- 
salem and the return from thence. John's words are as follow: 
And He went away again beyond Jordan into the place where John 
was first baptizing . This was GEnon, near to Salim (John iil 23). 
This question, concerning the putting away a wife, seems to have 
been very hotly debated in the time of Christ, just as it is now. 
Therefore the Pharisees proposed it to Him, that they might tempt 
Him, and find an occasion for carping at Him. For if Christ should 
say, It is not lawful to put away a wile. He would incur the hatred 
vou n. y 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



322 


S. MATTHEW, XIX. 


of many rich and carnal men who made a practice of divorce; But 
if, on the other hand, He should assert that divorce is lawful, then 
they were ready to insinuate that His doctrine was imperfect and 
carnal — His doctrine, I say, Who professed to be the teacher ol 
spiritual perfection, the Doctor sent from Heaven. The Abyssinians 
at the present day, like the Jews, frequently put away their wives, 
and marry others. Indeed, they sometimes take them only for a 
month, or a year. 

He answered, & c. Some think from this passage that Adam was 
created a hermaphrodite, and had in himself both sexes. But away 
with such puerilities. The meaning is as follows : Since Holy Scrip- 
ture did not say in the case of other animals (Gen. i. 27), that God 
made them male and female, but only as regards man, by this it is 
signified that it is only the marriage of the human race, and that of 
one male with one female, which was instituted by God. This union 
or marriage between Adam and Eve was so ordained that he 
could not put her away and many another. So SS. Chrysostom, 
Jerome, Theophylact, Euthymius. Again, from the fact that of one 
Adam two persons were made, namely Adam and Eve, and because 
Eve was formed from Adam, it is shown that monogamy is right, 
viz., that a wife ought not to be separated from her husband, foras- 
much as she is a part and a member of him. For as Plato says 
(Dial, de amore ), “ As it were of two imperfect parts one perfect 
man is formed." As therefore a member, such as the head, cannot 
be separated from a man, as to its origin and formation, so ought 
the marriage of one man and one woman to be perpetual and in- 
dissoluble, so that it can only be dissolved by death, even as the 
head can only be separated from the body by death. Wherefore 
Our Lord adds by way of explanation, For this cause shall a man leave 
his father and mother , and shall be joined unto his wife. Plato, and 
from him S. Basil (lib. de Virginit.), adds that this is the cause why 
\ man seeks a wife, as it were a part cut off from himself ; and 
as a magnet attracts iron, so does a woman a man. 

And said, viz., God, by the mouth of Adam, as a prophet, insti- 
tuting marriage with Adam and Eve. For this cause; Because the 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



THE MARRIAGE UNION, 


3*3 


woman being formed out of the man becomes flesh of his flesh 
and bone of his bone. Shall be joined \ Greek, irpovKoXkrfliiaeTai, 

1. e. t shall be agglutinated \ shall adhere closely and undividedly to 
his wife, by the most close and intimate bond of matrimony, and 
that leaving the society and often the home of his father and mother, 
he may dwell with his wife. 

And there shall be two in one flesh . (Vulg.) Greek, elc ahpKa 
piav f i.e.j into one flesh . This is commonly expounded of corporeal 
union. But it is better to take it more simply and purely as a 
Hebraism, signifying one human being, one civil person. For, by 
synecdoche flesh denotes the whole man. As therefore such a part 
of the body as the heart ought not to be separated from the body, 
so ought not a man to be separated from his wife. From hence it 
follows, moraliter, that a man and his wife ought so to love one 
another as the heart and the soul love the body to which they belong, 
and the body loves them. (See Eph. v. 28.) Again, from hence it 
follows that there is a common power over either body, that a man 
should have the same power over his wife’s body that he has over his 
own, and, vice versa , as the Apostle teaches (1 Cor. vii. 4). I have 
said more on this subject in Gen. ii. 24. 

No more twain .... joined , Greek <rvvt(evti, i.e,, has yoked to- 
gether, as in one yoke, whence married people are called <rvfvytc, 
because as two horses are coupled together by one yoke in a chariot, 
that they may draw it, so are two spouses coupled together by the 
one yoke of matrimony, that they may sustain it, and by it procreate, 
and bring up offspring. There is a twofold reason by which Christ 
proves that a man ought not to put away his wife. 1. A man’s 
putting away his wife is contrary to nature, just as it is contrary 
to nature that one flesh and one man should be divided into two. 

2. This divorce is contrary to the ordinance of God. If therefore 
it be done, it is done impiously, because what God hath joined to- 
gether is tom asunder. Who dares to annul what God has sanc- 
tioned ? Who dares to divide what God has united ? Who dares 
to mutilate the work of God the Creator, to tear asunder one man ? 
Falsely therefore saith Erasmus on 1 Cor. vii. “ What is rightly joined 

v a 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



3 2 4 


S. MATTHEW, XIX. 


together is what God hath united. God separateth what is rightly 
separated.” As though marriages improperly and inconsiderately 
entered into without God’s instigation might be set aside. For 
Christ speaks of nature, and the natural and primary institution of 
marriage, according to which marriage being once contracted in any 
Kray whatsoever, and by whomsoever as instigator, it is indissoluble. 
For nature requires this, that offspring may continuously be propa- 
gated by matrimony, and be advantageously brought up by both 
parents. This bringing up is, in the human race, a work of diffi- 
culty, and of long continuance, lasting up to the twentieth year of 
a child’s age, and sometimes longer. It is otherwise with beasts, 
which in a few months, or weeks come to adolescence, so that they 
do not longer require a father Or mother’s care. Wherefore their 
marriage is then dissolved. There is then an & priori reason why 
the indissolubility of marriage belongs to the jus naturae , and why 
fornication, pollution, divorce, and polygamy are contrary to that 
law. It is because God, who is the Lord of nature and of marriage, 
and of our bodies, so ordained at the very beginning of the world, 
and gave the right and use of our bodies only in the union of wed- 
lock. And if we use them in any other way, we abuse our bodies 
contrary to the will of God, who is the Supreme Lord ; and contrary 
to the law which He has ordained. That this is so appears from 
this, that in the Mosaic law God allowed a dispensation by which a 
new law was introduced which gave permission for polygamy, and a 
bill of divorce. Thus Hosea, by God’s command married a wife who 
had been a fomicatrix. Moreover the end and the cause why God 
ordained this absolute indissolubility of marriage, is, i. That there 
may be closer union and greater mutual love between those who are 
married. 2. For the sake of the better bringing up of children. 
The 3rd reason is an allegorical one : because marriage is a type and 
figure of the indissoluble Union of the Divine Word with our flesh, 
and through it with the Church. As the Apostle teaches us (Eph. v. 
32), “ This is a great sacrament I speak concerning Christ and 
the Church.” ( Vu/g.) 

Verse 7. They say 9 &c. The Pharisees object to Christ Why 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



CHRIST REPEALS THE BILL OF DIVORCE. 325 

hath Moses commanded f In order to make their objection the 
stronger, they use the word command , whereas Moses, as Christ 
observes in the following verse, only permitted the bill of divorce. It 
was only that sort of command which is conditional, not absolute. 
Moses had commanded that if the Jews would put away their wives, 
they could only do so by giving a writing of divorcement I have 
fully entered into every thing connected with this bill of divorce on 
Deut. iv. 1. We must here supply from S. Mark x. 3, 4, that when 
the Pharisees asked Christ whether it were lawful to put away a wife, 
He first answered and said unto them, “ what did Moses command 
you ? And they said, Moses suffered to write a bill of divorcement, 
and to put her away.” Thus Christ as Matthew here has it in the fourth 
verse unfolds the original institution of marriage by God, and its 
indissolubility. Then the Pharisees rejoined, Why then did Moses 
command to give a bill of divorce* and to put her away ? J esus answered, 
Moses permitted this because of the hardness of your hearts. But 
it was not so from the beginning. Thus by prefixing the words in 
Mark, and affixing those in Matthew, we show the agreement of the 
two Evangelists. 

Verse 8. Moses suffered. He alters commanded into suffered* or 
permitted. Moses suffered you to put away your wives, when you 
hated them, lest if you could not divorce them, you should kill them. 
For so great was the hardness and carnality of your hearts that ye 
would rather put them to death than be without the pleasure of a new 
and desired marriage. 

From the beginning. When man’s nature had become corrupted 
by sin, man changed and corrupted this institution of God, and gave 
occasion for divorce and polygamy. 

Verse 9. But I say , &c. Christ used those words upon two 
occasions. 1. Publicly in this place to the Jews and the Pharisees. 
When He here promulgated His new law, by which He revoked the 
power of giving a bill of divorce, and brought back marriage to 
its primeval institution and indissolubility. 2. Shortly afterwards He 
repeated the words in private to his disciples. (Mark x. 10, 11, 12.) 

1 say 9 Le., I enact, and as the Lawgiver of the New Law, I 


Digitized by OooQle 


326 


S. MATTHEW, XIX. 


ordain, and bring back marriage to its original rectitude and 
steadfastness. And I declare that whosoever shall put away his wife 
and shall marry another shall be accounted, and shall be in fact an 
adulterer. 

Except for fornication . That is, except on account of adultery. 
For what in those who are free is fornication, in the married is 
adultery. And this dissolves marriage quoad thorum , though not 
quoad vinculum . For the adulterer does not keep the faith which he 
gave to his spouse. Whence he may be put away by his spouse, 
according to the saying, “ With him who has broken troth, let troth 
be broken.” 

From this exception, the Greeks, according to the testimony of 
Guido the Carmelite (Tract, de Hceresibus ), and modem heretics 
gather and conclude that if whoso putteth away his wife except for 
fornication, and marry another, committeth adultery ; then, on the 
contrary, whosoever shall put away his wife on account of fornication, 
and shall marry another, does not commit adultery. Whence they 
are of opinion that marriage is dissolved by adultery, not only quoad 
thorum , but quoad vinculum , that under such circumstances a man 
may contract another marriage. Thus Luther, Calvin, Erasmus, and 
speaking generally, the Lutherans, Calvinists, Anabaptists, and among 
Catholics, Catharinus, and Cajetan. And so in practice the Greeks 
and heretics act But this is an error condemned by the perpetual 
tradition of the Church, and by S. Paul (Rom. viL i, and i Cor. viL 
io, n), and expressly by the Council of Trent ( Sess . 24 . Con. 6, 7). 
To the argument deduced a contrario , Paul of Burgos, on this passage, 
(additione 2. ad Lyran.) replies by admitting the consequence, but 
adds that Christ was speaking only of the Old Law, in which on 
account of fornication a bill of divorce was allowed to be given. But 
there is this difficulty in such a reply, that Christ both here and in 
the fifth of Matthew expressly opposes His own words, that is the 
evangelical Law, to Moses and the Old Law; in fact He repeals 
that bill of divorce which Moses had allowed. Verses 8 and 9. 
“ He saith unto them, Moses, because of the hardness of your hearts, 
suffered you to put away your wives : but from the beginning it was 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



MEANING OF THE EXCEPTION. 


327 


not so. And I say unto you, Whosoever shall put away his wife, 
except it be for fornication, and shall marry another, committeth 
adultery : and whoso marrieth her which is put away doth commit 
adultery.” Observe how plainly Christ opposes His own word to 
the sanction which Moses had given to the bill of divorce, and 
how He condemns whosoever makes use of it, as guilty of 
adultery. 

I say therefore that it is better with S. Augustine (lib. 1. de adult 
onjug. c. 9.) to take the word except negatively, so that the expression, 
save for the cause of fornication, means the same thing as apart from 
the cause of fornication. This is supported by the Greek and Syriac 
which have, not an adulteress. As though Christ only intended to 
affirm that a chaste and faithful wife might not be put away, but 
intended to say nothing about an adulterous wife, in order to escape 
the hatred of the Pharisees and the people, who were at that time 
used to divorce 

a. The word except , can be taken in its proper, exceptive sense, 
but it should be referred not to the words which immediately follow, 
and marry another , but only to those which preceded, whosoever shall 
put away his wife, so as to make an exception in the case of fornication. 
Then the words would be taken as follows, Whosoever shall put away 
his wife, which is not lawful, eouept for fornication, and shall marry 
another, committeth adultery. The Ethiopic favours this view, trans- 
lating as follows, Whosoever, on account of any other cause than on 
account of fornication, shall put away his wife, and marry another, is 
in adulterer. Similarly the Persian, Every man who puts away his 
wife, and not on account of adultery, and marries another , is an 
adulterer. 

3. Most clearly and aptly from Theophylact and Augustine (lib. 
cont. Adamant, c. 3), you may refer this exception to both what pre- 
cedes and what follows. Thus, Whoso shall put away his wife, 
unless for fornication, and marries another, commits adultery. He 
commits adultery, I say, both by putting away his wife, as well as by 
marrying another. That is, he is twice an adulterer. Christ gives an 
answer to both the questions put to Him, for the Pharisees had asked 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


S. MATTHEW, XIX. 


3*8 

two. And both answers are true. For even though a man should 
only divorce a chaste wife, without marrying another, he commits 
adultery, both because he breaks the law of marriage, by violating 
one of its conditions by putting away an innocent wife, as well as by 
causing her to commit adultery, as Christ explains in Matthew v. 32. 
For verbs of the Hebrew conjugation Kal y often in Hiphil 9 signify 
the double action as above. This is well known to Hebrew scholars. 
Whence from the contrary you can only infer as follows, Whoso shall 
put away his wife unless for fornication , and shall marry another , com- 
mits adultery . Therefore he who puts away his wife on account of 
fornication, and marries another, does not indeed commit adultery 
by divorcing the adulteress, but by marrying another. It is the same 
form of expression as if you should say, u He who breaks his fast 
without a dispensation, and gets drunk, commits sin. Therefore he 
who does not fast, having a dispensation, does not sin by eating, but 
sins by getting drunk.” 

I say, 2. Christ here concedes divorce to a man on account of 
the fornication of his wife, quoad thorum , but not the dissolution of 
marriage, so that he may marry another. This appears, 1. because 
Mark and Luke lay down a general proposition, and omit this excep- 
tion. This is what Luke says, xvi. 18 : “Whosoever putteth away 
his wife, and marrieth another, committeth adultery : and whosoever 
marrieth her that is put away from her husband committeth adultery.” 
For he does her a great wrong, breaking the troth which he had given 
her. 

You will say, why then does Matthew add this exception? I 
answer, because the Pharisees had virtually proposed two questions 
to Christ. The first was, whether it was lawful for any cause to 
divorce a wife ? The second, whether when a wife was put away by 
a bill of divorce, the marriage was dissolved, and another might be 
entered upon? For they put away their wives that they may many again. 
Christ then replies to both questions ; and as it seems by means 01 
two propositions. 1. Whoso shall put away his wife except for forni- 
cation, commits adultery. 2. Whoso shall marry another, commits 
adultery. For together with the bill of divorce he abolishes poly- 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



MARRIAGE INDISSOLUBLE. 


329 


gamy, which had hitherto been allowed. The pronoun whosoever 
must be repeated. Matthew, here as elsewhere studying conciseness, 
throws two sentences of Christ, each with its whosoever , into one. 
Hence that saying is true, u I labour to be brief, I become obscure.” 
The same thing is proved, 2. by what precedes, when Christ by the 
original institution of marriage, which fornication does not annul, 
proves that matrimony is altogether indissoluble. 3. Because in 
what follows, this exception is not to be understood, as if it were 
said, And he who shall marry her that is put away , except for forni- 
cation, commits adultery. For so she that is put away on account of 
fornication would be in a better position, with respect to another 
contract of marriage, than an innocent woman who has been divorced. 
4. Because S. Paul so teaches (1 Cor. vii., 10, n), and the Fathers 
passim. SS. Jerome, Chrysostom, Bede, in this passage, S. Augustine 
in his two Books on Adultery, Innocent I. (Epist. ad Exuper.) 
Concil. Milev. (Can. 17). Forojuliense ( Canon 10), Nannetense (C<z//. 
10), Florentin. (in instruct. Armeniens.) Trident (Sess. 14, Can . 6). 
Origen, in this passage {Tract. 7), animadverts severely upon certain 
bishops of his time, for conceding with Tertullian (lib. 4, cont. Marc.) 
and Ambrosiaster (in Cor. vii.), second nuptials to wives on account 
of the adultery of their husbands, saying that it is lawful for the 
innocent spouse to put away an adulterous partner, and to marry 
another. The same license is given by the Council of Illiberis. (31 
queest. 1 cap. Si qua mulier.) Also in Concil. Aurelian 1, cap. 10. But 
the decrees of those Councils are either apocryphal, or else are cited 
imperfeedy by Gratian. 

Ver. 10. His disciples say , &c. Case, i.e., matter, business. So the 
Syriac translates, If the case of those who are married be thus , if the 
indissolubility of marriage be so great, if a man be so strictly bound 
to his wife, that he cannot put her away for anything except fornica- 
tion, but must live with her, though she be odious, quarrelsome, de- 
formed, nasty, and so on, and must have close connection with her 
until death, it is better not to marry a wife , as the Syriac has it For 
the Greek yapfaai applies both to men and women. It may be 
that the Vulgate in translating by nubere t alludes to the servitude and 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



33 ° 


S. MATTHEW, XIX. 


subjection, by which a man is bound to a woman, and not seldom, 
if he wishes to have quietness, must give in to her, and bear patiently 
her complaints, quarrels, and reproaches. S. Chrysostom gives the 
reason : “ It is easier to fight against concupiscence and ourselves 
than against a bad woman.” Whence Cato said, “ A wife is a neces- 
sary evil.” Hence too the illustrious Sir Thomas More, who suffered 
martyrdom under Henry VIII. of England, being asked why he had 
married a little wife, replied sportively, " Of evils I chose the least” 
So Stapleton in his life. 

Ver. n. To whom it is given : Arabic, those who are given, viz., 
to God and continence. So in Religious Orders those who are con 
verted are called given , i.e., to religion. 

Do not receive: Origen and Nazianzen (Orat. 31.) translate X'upoutn 
are not capable. And by capacity they mean a natural inclination to 
celibacy, which all have not But it is better to translate with the 
Vulgate do not receive , or contain. As it were, narrow vessels do not 
receive into them, do not embrace so arduous a counsel as that of 
celibacy, but only those to whom is given by God this great gift of 
continency. Where observe, although all the faithful may not have 
the gift of continency, so that they have continence in act, as all the just 
have not the gift of perseverance, by which they actually persevere in 
justice, yet all the just have the gift of perseverance in such sense, 
that they may, if they will, persevere in God’s grace. Thus in like 
manner all the faithful have the gift of continence in the first instance. 
And by it they may contain if they will; viz., if they assiduously beg 
of God the grace of continence, and if they co-operate with that 
grace by guarding their eyes, by fleeing from sloth, and so on. Thus 
SS. Chrysostom, Origen, Theophylact, Euthymius, Jerome in this 
place, S. Augustine (in Psalm 138), S. Ambrose (lib. 3, de Viduis ), 
Tertullian (lib. de Monog . ), and others. Christ in this place, as well 
as S. Paul (1 Cor. viL 7), gives the counsel of continence to every 
believer. For nothing is counselled except what is in man’s power 
and good pleasure with God’s grace, which truly He offers and pro- 
vides for all who ask it It is otherwise with the gifts of prophecy, 
tongues, healing, miracles. For the grace of these God does not offer 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



ON CONTINENCE. 


331 


to every one, but only to a few of His elect for the common good of 
the faithful. Listen to S. Jerome, “ It is given to those who have 
wished, who have laboured that they may receive.” So, too, Euthy- 
mius says, " It is given to those who ask, but not for mere asking, 
but to those who ask fervently and perseveringly. What is meant 
is that virginity is a gift of God, given to those who ask for it as 
they ought to ask.” So also Auctor Imperfect *, “When He says, to 
whom it is given, it is not meant that it is given to some and not 
to others, but He shows that unless we receive the help of grace, we 
have no power at all of ourselves. But grace is not refused to those 
who desire, for the Lord says, Ask and ye shall have.” And S. 
Chrysostom, “ If it is a work of election, wherefore is it that He 
immediately said, All do not receive it , &c. ? It is that you may 
learn thoroughly the peculiar nature of this warfare, that it is not 
like a kind of necessity bestowed as it were at random. It is given 
to those who freely choose it He spoke as He did in order that 
He might show the necessity of grace from above — which grace is 
provided for all who seek it, if we would come forth victors in 
this warfare.” S. Chrysostom adds that we ought not to be sloth- 
ful in our resolution of continence, because some may fall from 
continence. Since soldiers falling in battle do not discourage 
their comrades, but rather stir them up to fight more valiantly. 
Lastly, the same S. Chrysostom suggests a consideration, by 
means of which celibacy is shown to be not only possible but easy 
to every one. “ Consider with thyself,” he says, “ that if thou 
wert a eunuch, either by nature, or by the wrong-doing of man, 
thou wouldst be deprived of these pleasures, and wouldst obtain 
no reward by being deprived of them. Give thanks therefore to 
God, because thou wilt obtain great rewards and bright crowns, 
if thou livest thus as they do without any rewards at all. 
Yea, indeed thou mayest do it much more easily, safely and 
pleasantly than they can, both because thou art strengthened by the 
hope of recompense, and because thou rejoicest in the consciousness 
of thy virtue, and art not tossed by such vast billows of desire. 
For the cutting off a member is not like the bridle of reason : yea 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



33 * 


S. MATTHEW, XIX. 


verily, it is reason alone which restrains such waves as these we 
are speaking of. For I should not say that this sting of desire 
proceeds from the brain, or from the loins, but from a lascivious 
mind, and from neglecting to watch over the thoughts/’ 

Ver. 12. There are eunuchs , &c. Who when they might be hus- 
bands, become eunuchs for Christ’s sake, says S, Jerome. Christ 
here speaks of three sorts of eunuchs, i. Those who are such by 
nature. 2. Those who have been made eunuchs artificially, that 
they may guard queens and noble matrons. 3. Those who have 
made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of Heaven’s sake. Christ 
here alludes to Isaiah lvi. 3, 4, 5, where the prophet foretells that 
there should be such eunuchs in Christ’s church, and promises them a 
name better than of sons and daughters, yea an everlasting name. 

Made themselves eunuchs : This expression has two meanings. 1. 
That it is in our power with God’s grace to make ourselves eunuchs, 
i.e. f chaste and celibate, and to keep so by a perpetual vow. This 
is the force of the verb, have made themselves , signifying a moral in- 
ability to beget children. If it were not so, He would have said, 
There are who make themselves eunuchs, or who endeavour to do 
so. But he says, have made themselves , i.e., have taken Cram them- 
selves the power of generating, that is to say by a vow of continence. 
So S. Epiphan. (Hares. 58), S. Fulgentius (lib. de fide ad Pet.). 

Origen took these words literally. He mutilated himself out of 
his love of chastity. But he was wrong in doing so, both because 
such self-mutilation is unlawful, as well as because lust is not thereby 
quenched but inflamed. Hear S. Chrysostom: “When He says, 
Have made themselves eunuchs , He does not speak of the cutting off 
of members, but of the suppression of evil thoughts. For he who 
mutilates himself renders himself liable to a curse. Neither is con- 
cupiscence thereby assuaged, but is made more troublesome.” For 
eunuchs sin in thought, through the desire of lust, grieving that they 
cannot fulfil it. See what I have said on Eccles. xx. 2, andxxxix. 21. 

For the kingdom of Heaven's sake , that by continence they may 
merit it. So Origen, Hilary, Chrysostom, Euthymius, and S. Augus- 
tine (de Virgin, cap. 23). Falsely, therefore, do the heretics expound 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



ALL HAVE THE POWER. 


333 


for the kingdom of Heaver? s sake to mean for the sake of preaching. 
As though it meant, There are some who abstain from marriage that 
they may be more free to preach the Gospel, or that they may be 
free from the anxieties which matrimony brings with it. For con- 
tinence is not only to be praised and desired for such reasons as 
those, but for its own sake ; because it is a great virtue, and because 
the victory over himself, by which a man overcomes lust, raises his 
mind to meditate upon and follow after heavenly things. Wherefore 
chastity makes men angels. 

He that is able , &c. ; Arabic, He that is able to carry it \ let him 
carry it. Note here the evangelical counsel of celibacy, proposed, 
yea counselled, by Christ to all men, though not commanded. For 
these words, he that is able , &c., are those of one exhorting and 
animating to celibacy, say SS. Jerome and Chrysostom. Moreover, 
it is signified that as Christ gives this counsel, it is in our power to 
fulfil it, if we will invoke the grace of God, and co operate with grace. 
Nor does the expression he that is able do away with the force of 
this ; for all that this means is, that continence is a difficult thing. 
And he who is willing to put constraint upon himself, generously to 
withstand lust, to mount up to the lofty pinnacle of continence ; let 
such an one embrace the same, let him receive it All the faithful, 
then, have the power of continence, not proximate, but remote 
So the Fathers already cited on verse n. Hear S. Chrysostom, 
speaking in the name of all : “ All, therefore, cannot receive it, 
because all do not wish. The palm is set before them : he who 
desires glory does not think of the labour. No one would conquer 
if all were afraid of danger.” Hear, too, S. Jerome (lib. i, cont \ 
Jovinian)'. “ The master of the games proposes the reward. He 
invites to the course. He holds in His hand the prize of virginity. 
He points to the most pure fountain, and chants, Whoso thirsteth, 
let him come unto Me and drink. He that is able to receive it, let 
him receive it” From these things it appears how foolish and carnal 
is Calvin's exposition, which is as follows : “ You, O ye Apostles, 
think that it is a good thing to live without a wife ; but I forbid 
any one to attempt so to do unless he is certain that he can live 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


334 


S. MATTHEW, XIX. 


without a wife” For Christ does not forbid celibacy, but exhorts to 
it. Neither can any one be certain that he has the gift, except either 
he have a revelation from God — which is given to very few — or else 
by experience has had proof of his own continence. And how can 
a man be certain about his continence before he has made the trial? 
Still worse is what Luther taught — that it is as impossible for a man 
to be without a wife as to be without food or drink. No doubt it is 
impossible for the heretics, but not for the orthodox, who are 
strengthened by faith and the grace of Christ. 

Then were brought (Vulg., were offered) to Him. Rebuked — because 
they thought Christ was occupied with more important matters, such 
as instructing men ; and that He must not be called off to attend to 
little children, as not having the use of reason ; and that it was 
unworthy so great a prophet to busy Himself about children. For 
little children Luke has (xviii. 15) /Sptyi?, infants . But infancy lasts 
until the seventh year. 

Moraliter: let princes here learn from Christ, Who is the King 
of kings and Lord of lords, to make themselves accessible to the 
poor, to women and children, and graciously to hear and grant their 
supplications and requests. This was done by several of the Roman 
emperors, even of those who were heathens. Such was Titus, who, 
as Suetonius testifies, was wont to say, “ No one ought to go away 
sorrowful after talking with a prince.” And on the day when he had 
not done a kindness to any one, he groaned and said, “Alas! I have 
lost a day.” Next there was Trajan, of whom Pliny says in his 
Panegyric , “ Thou dost not suffer citizens to embrace thy feet, nor 
return a kiss with thine hand. All who approach thee come close to 
thy side ; and it is their own sense of modesty, not thy haughtiness, 
which puts an end to the conference.” And, a little afterwards : 
u There is no difficulty in obtaining an audience, there is no delay in 
giving an answer : forthwith they are heard, forthwith they receive 
a reply.” Then there was Alexander Severus, of whom Lampridius 
says : “ So great was his moderation, that no one was ever removed 
from his side ; he made himself so bland and affable to all men, 
that he used to visit pot only his friends of the first and second ranks. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHRIST BLESSES CHILDREN. 


335 


but the sick of even a lower degree.” Lastly, of the Christian 
emperors, Pacatus says to Theodosius in his Panegyric, “ When the 
people are waiting for you, you make it plain not only that you are 
willing to be seen, but easy of approach. You receive from him 
who is nearest to you the petitions of all your people.” 

Thai He would put His hands ; that by this imposition of hands 
He might bless them, and so implore Divine grace for them, that 
they might grow up to be wise and holy men. That this was an 
ancient practice of the Hebrews is gathered from Gen. xlviii. 14, 
where Jacob— extending his arms in such a way as to form the figure 
of a cross — blessed the two young sons of Joseph. See also Ecclus. 
iii. 11 : “The blessing of a father strengthens the house of sons; 
but the curse of a mother roots out their foundations.” From Christ 
has been derived the custom among Christians, that lay people, and 
especially children, should ask a blessing from their elders and from 
priests. This is the case in Belgium, where boys will run up to the 
priests and religious men, and ask them to sign them with the sign 
of the cross. They are taught to do this both by the catechists 
and by their parents. Remigius says this was a custom among the 
Jews before the time of Christ The great Sir Thomas More, the 
glory of England and a martyr, when he was Lord High Chancellor, 
publicly asked his aged father to give him his blessing, as Stapleton 
testifies. Moreover, the Church uses this ceremony of imposition of 
hands in Baptism, Orders, Penance, and whenever heretics are 
received into the Church. It is to pray for and obtain the gift of 
the Holy Ghost 

But Jesus said, &c. Victor of Antioch mentions five natural en- 
dowments why Christ has so great a love for the little ones. “ The 
mind of a child is pure, and free from all vicious passions. It does 
not remember injuries, nor meditate upon revenge. In like manner, 
although a child may be severely chastised by its mother, yet will it 
run to her before any one else, and is attached to her more than to 
any other woman. And if you should show it a queen with a diadem 
upon her head, in no wise would it prefer her to its mother clothed 
in rags. It would rather see its mother clothed in rags than a queen 


d 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



336 


S. MATTHEW, XIX. 


in her royal apparel. Then a child requires nothing more than 
nature demands. Thus as soon as it is satisfied, it leaves it mother’s 
breasts. Moreover it is never grieved at the loss of those things, 
of which we make so great account, such as money and jewels. 
Lastly, it is not carried away by corporeal beauty, as other human 
beings are. Wherefore the Lord said, Of such is the kingdom of 
Heaven. Assuredly by them does He admonish us, that we should 
do such things by the firm choice of our own will, which little 
children do by natural endowment” (On Mark x. 13.) Thus 
Christ chose out and blessed when they were children, S. Edmund, 
afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury, S. Nicholas, S. Catharine of 
Siena, and other eminent saints. When Gelasius was a boy he found 
his little brother, S. Ophilus, praying in his chamber, and a company 
of angels talking with him. He saw them with his own eyes, and 
heard a voice saying, Suffer the little children to come unto Me, for of 
such is the kingdom of Heaven . As he became older he grew in 
holiness, and like a fruitful olive tree in the house of the Lord, he 
brought forth abundant fruit, and thus in his early youth, he passed 
to Christ S. Babylas, Patriarch of Antioch, and an illustrious 
martyr under the Emperor Numerianus, being by him condemned to 
death, desired that three boys, whom he had brought up in faith and 
piety might be beheaded before him, lest they should be led astray. 
He offered them to Christ as innocent victims, and said, “ Behold I 
and the children, whom the Lord hath given me for a sign.” Thus 
it is in his Life in Surius. 

Learn from hence with what care children ought to be brought up, 
and instructed, that they may remain pure, for “ the newly made jar 
long preserves the savour of what it first contains.” 

S. Basil proves the advantages of early religious training from these 
words of Christ He asks (in Reg. Dispuiat. interrog. 292), "Is 
it fitting that a master of boys living in the world should be a 
Brother? He answers in the affirmative. Let the Lord’s command be 
kept, Suffer the little children to come unto Me.” For young children 
go forth amongst the adult members of society, and what they have 
learnt in youth, they retain in old age. Children are the nursery of 
the Church and of the commonwealth. 


Digitized by 


Google 



PERFECT VIRTUE. 


337 

Of such, &c. Syriac, Of those who are like them. Whence Luke adds, 
Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child , he shall in 
nowise enter therein. Christ's meaning here is as though He said, “It 
is not beneath My dignity to bless young children, because through 
My blessing they are made fit for the Kingdom of Heaven, whilst 
you, O ye adult Jews, who have often heard Me teaching are unfitted 
for it on account of your pride, and your other vices by which you 
have become callous. Wherefore in order that ye may become fit, 
ye must become like unto these little ones.” Hear S. Ambrose (lib. 
8 , in cap . 18 Luc.): “This age is weak in physical strength, and 
immature in mind and judgment It is not therefore childhood 
which is meant, so much as the goodness which emulates childhood’s 
simplicity.” And a little afterwards, speaking symbolically, “ Who is 
the child which is to be imitated by the Apostles of Christ? It is 
He of whom Isaiah speaks, Unto us a Child is bom, unto us a Son 
is given. For it is that Child who saith to thee, Take up thy Cross, 
and follow Me. And that thou mayest recognise who He is — when 
He was reviled, He reviled not again, when He was smitten, He 
smote not back. Here is perfect virtue. Therefore there is in child- 
hood a kind of venerable character of old age, and in old age an 
innocent childhood.” From hence it is plain that the Anabaptists 
are wrong in keeping children away from Baptism, and so from Christ 
and the kingdom of heaven, on the ground that infants have not the 
use of reason, and therefore cannot believe. For although they may 
not have the act of faith, they may have the habit of faith. Because 
a habit (habitus) of faith, and grace and charity is infused into them 
by Baptism. They believe moreover in act by the faith of the 
Church, Le. y of their parents, and the faithful of the Church, who 
often exercise acts of faith on behalf of themselves and all who 
belong to them. 

And when He had laid } &c. The hands of Christ conferred life and 
salvation. The reason is because the hand is the organ of organs. 
Wherefore the Godhead of Christ exercised His Divine power and 
grace towards those whom He touched through His hands, giving 
them health both of body and soul, or increasing the grace given 
VOL. il * i 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



8. MATTHEW, XIX. 


33 & 

them in circumcision, and in other ways, sanctifying them, and 
offering them to God, and as it were consecrating them. Whence 
we need not doubt that these young children who were blessed 
by Christ grew up to be wise and holy men, who afterwards became 
rulers of Churches, and propagated the faith of Christ So Francis 
Lucas. 

And behold one , &c. S. Jerome thinks that this one was the lawyer 
of whom Luke speaks (x. 25), and so that he came with the inten- 
tion of tempting Christ S. Chrysostom’s opinion is preferable, that 
it was a different person, and that he came with a sincere intention 
of asking how he could become like a little child, according to 
Christ’s precept, and so become a partaker of everlasting life. 
Wherefore he is the same person who is spoken of in Luke xviiL 18. 
This becomes plain by a comparison of the two passages, especially 
ver. 22, where it is said that when he had heard Christ’s doctrine 
concerning perfection, If thou wilt be perfect go and sell what thou 
hast, and give to the poor , he went away sorrowful because he was rich. 
But this is evidence that he had asked these things of Christ from a 
sincere desire of salvation. 

Good Master : This is a common Hebrew form of salutation by 
which persons sought the good will of a doctor or prophet As 
though they said, “ Rabbi, I know that thou art good, both as a man, 
and as a doctor and a prophet, who teachest us those things which 
are indeed good, and which lead to happiness. Tell me therefore 
what special good thing shall I do, that I may obtain the chief good 
in Heaven ? ” He plays upon the word good. 

Ver. 17. He said unto Him , &c The Vulgate translator read in 
the Greek, ri fu ipwryc wepl hyadov ; This was S. Augustine’s read- 
ing, and that which S. Jerome followed in his commentary. Why 
askest thou me concerning good t The present reading is that given in 
the text Origen gives both readings. He subjoins the reason, 
saying — 

Ofie is goody God : viz., in His nature and essence. Humbly does 
Christ refer this praise of His goodness to God, that He may teach 
us to do the same. For this man had not perfect faith concerning 


Digitized by v^ooQle 


THE FOUNTAIN OF ALL GOOD. 339 

Christ, nor did he believe Him to be God. To this faith Christ de- 
sired to raise him by chiding him as it were. As though He had 
said, “ If thou callest Me good, believe that I am God : for no 
one is good of himself save God.” So S. Jerome, Theophylact, 
Euthymius. 

Moreover good means the same as perfect, and the perfection of a 
thing is its goodness. That God is perfect, S. Denis proves in many 
ways (de Divin, Nomin. c. io.) In God there is infinite perfection 
both of nature and wisdom, of power, holiness and virtue. There is 
therefore in Him the highest goodness, natural, moral and super- 
natural Wherefore He is the Fountain of all good, in whom all the 
excellencies of all creatures are gathered together, and infinitely more 
than there are in the creatures. Wherefore in God there is in an 
eminent degree the beauty of gold, the splendour of jewels, the savour 
of delicacies, the harmony of music, the pleasantness of gardens, and 
whatsoever there is lovely, pleasant and delicious in the creatures. 
Hence it is from God that honey derives its sweetness, the sun its 
radiance, the stars their light, the heavens their glory, angels their 
wisdom, men their virtue, animals their sensations, plants their life, 
and all other things whatsoever they have of good : yea it is to the 
bounty of God that they as mendicants owe their very existence, as 
a drop out of the ocean. In God therefore is all good, and that in 
a perfect and infinite degree. In God is the allurement of all love, 
the consummation of all desire, the satisfying of all appetite. Why 
then, O wretched man, dost thou wander about among these poor 
created goods, and with all art not satisfied ? Seek good in Him in 
whom is all good. Love and desire God. He alone can fully satisfy 
thy appetite and thy thirst : in this life through grace, but how much 
more in the life to come through glory : yea by Himself. For in 
heaven God manifests Himself that He may be beheld by the 
blessed as the chief good, that they may taste Him and enj oyHim. 

If thou will enter , &c. Calvin foolishly, if not impiously, imagines 
that Christ is here addressing the young man ironically, because he 
trusted in the works of the Law ; inasmuch as there is no road to 
Heaven through the keeping of the commandments, since it is 

2 2 


2 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



340 


S. MATTHEW, XIX. 


impossible for men ; but by faith. There are here as many errors 
and heresies, yea blasphemies, as there are words. It is diametrically 
opposed to what Christ declares, and is subversive of it Hence it 
is plain that Calvin was not led by the Spirit of Christ but of Anti- 
christ See among Catholics, Maldonatus, who writes with the ex- 
press object of refuting Calvin and the Protestants. Let us go on 
to speak of what will be of more use to the orthodox. Christ here 
teaches that not faith alone justifies and saves, but that good works 
are also required, by which in fulfilling the law, we may obtain the 
prize of eternal life, which has been promised by God to those who 
fulfil the law. Calvin urges — At least Christ by the commandments 
of God here excludes the precepts and traditions of the Church, of 
Pontiffs and Prelates. I reply they are included in the fifth com- 
mandment, “ Honour thy father and thy mother.” For Prelates are 
spiritual fathers. 

Verse 18. He saiih unto Him , &c. As thyself; Syriac, as thy 
soul I have expounded these commandments in Deut v. 6. Christ 
in this place only propounded the precepts of the second table 
having reference to our neighbour, because in them are included the 
precepts of the first table concerning God. For the love of God 
produces love of our neighbour. For we love him for the sake of 
God. Wherefore the love of our neighbour flows from love of God. 
Again it is more difficult to love our neighbour than to love God. 
For who is there who does not love God, especially among religious 
people, such as this youth was ? 

The young man saith , &c. From my youth; Syriac and Arabic, 
from my childhood — meaning, from a child I have been brought up 
in God’s law, and been prevented by His grace. I have carefully 
kept all God’s commandments. What lack I yet t Le., of goodness : 
that I may become perfected therein, and have eternal lifet Not in 
any fashion, as all have it who keep the commandments, but surely 
and securely, and in large measure ; in the chief and perfect degree 
of happiness and glory. For Thou, O Christ, as the Master of 
Heavenly virtue seemest to deliver a higher doctrine concerning it 
than our Scribes. Tell me therefore what it is? For I covet salva 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



VOLUNTARY POVERTY. 


341 


tion and perfection. S. Jerome thinks that this young man told a 
falsehood, for if he had loved his neighbour as himself, he would 
have sold all his goods, and given to the poor. But this argument is 
not absolutely convincing. For to love one’s neighbour as oneself is 
of precept : but to give all one’s goods to the poor is of counsel. 
And Christ, as Mark says, beholding him, loved him, and gave him 
this advice concerning bestowing all his goods upon the poor, that he 
might go on to perfectioa 

Jesus saitk unto him , &c. This is not an evangelical precept, 
but a counsel. Whence He saith, if thou wilt This is to say, I do 
not command, but I advise. Mark adds (x. 21), Then Jesus beholding 
him, loved him, and said unto him , One thing thou lackest: go thy way , 
sell whatsoever thou hast , and give to the poor . S. Anthony, hearing 
these words of Christ read at Mass, left all things, and so followed 
Christ, says S. Athanasius in his life. S. Prosper of Regium, who 
was afterwards a bishop, did the same, in the time of S. Leo, as 
is recorded in his Life in Surius. June. 25. 

Deservedly therefore S. Bernard says (in Declam an. sub initium .), 
“ These are the words which in all the world have persuaded men to 
a contempt of the world, and to voluntary poverty. They are the 
words which fill the cloisters with monks, the deserts with anchorites. 
These, I say, are the words which spoil Egypt, and strip it of the best 
of its goods. This is the living and effectual word, converting souls, 
by the happy emulations of sanctity, and the faithful promise of 
truth. For Simon Peter saith unto Jesus — Lo we have left all things.” 
Wherefore S. Jerome, by this saying of Christ, as by the sound of a 
trumpet constantly stirs up his own people, as well as all of us to a 
zeal for poverty. Whence (Epist. 150, ad Hedib .), he says, “Dost 
thou wish to be perfect, and to stand in the first rank of dignity ? 
Then do what the Apostles did. Sell what thou hast, and give to 
the poor, and follow the Saviour ; and follow the bare and only cross 
with virtue for thine only cloke.” Still more clearly does the same 
S. Jerome speak (Epist 24, ad Julian!), “And this I exhort, if thou 
wilt be perfect, if thou desirest the summit of Apostolic dignity, if 
to raise up the cross and follow Christ, if to take hold of the plough, 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



34 * 


S. MATTHEW, XIX. 


and not to look back, if placed on the top of the house, thou des- 
pisest thine old garments, and wouldest escape the Egyptian woman, 
*hy mistress, leaving the worlds pallium. Whence also Elias, when 
he was hastening to the kingdom of Heaven is not able to go with 
his mantle, but leaves his unclean garments to the world (mundo 
immunda vestimenta dimittii.). But this, thou sayest is a question ot 
Apostolic dignity, and of the man who wishes to be perfect. But 
why art thou unwilling to be perfect too ? Why shouldest not thou 
who art first in the world, be first also in the family of Christ ? ” 
After a little he adds, “ But if thou shalt give thyself to the Lord, and 
being perfect in Apostolic virtue, shalt begin to follow the Saviour, 
thou shalt then understand where thou art, and how in Christ’s army 
thou holdest the last place.” 

Observe: Christian perfection chiefly and primarily consists in 
charity ; nevertheless it is placed by Christ in evangelical counsels, 
as it were means and instruments suitable for acquiring charity. 
(See S. Thovias, ii. 2 q. 184, art. 3.) This perfection all the religious 
aim at who renounce all their possessions, that naked they may follow 
a naked Christ. Yet do not all immediately at the beginning obtain 
this perfection, but they tend towards it by degrees ; and by making 
continual progress, they at length arrive at it Hence, wisely does 
Climacus ( Gradus 26) make three grades of such persons — namely, 
beginners, those who are making progress, and the perfect To 
beginners he delivers this alphabet, not of twenty-four letters, but of 
virtues. “ The best elementary alphabet of all,” he says, “is obedi- 
ence, fasting, a hair shirt, ashes, tears, confession, silence, humility, 
vigils, fortitude, cold, fatigue, affliction, contempt, contrition, forget- 
fulness of injuries, brotherly love, gentleness, a simple and incurious 
faith, the neglect of the world, the affections kept free from all 
things, simplicity united with innocence, voluntary vileness.” To 
such as are making progress he assigns these greater precepts of 
virtues. “ The lot and the method of those who are progressing is 
victory over vain glory and anger, a good hope of salvation, quiet- 
ness of mind, discretion, a firm and constant remembrance of the 
Last Judgment, mercy, hospitality, modest reproof, speech free from 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



THE BLESSINGS OF POVERTY. 


343 


all vicious affections.” Lastly, to the perfect he delivers these maxims 
of complete sanctity : “ A heart free from all captivity, perfect love, 
a fount of humility, the mind's departure- from the vanities of the 
world, and going to Christ, a treasure of light and Divine prayer 
secure from robbers, abundance of divine illumination, desire of 
death, hatred of life, and flight from the body.” And then he adds 
that “a perfect man is so holy, and so pleasing to God, that he may 
be the ambassador, or the patron and advocate of the world, who is 
able (in a certain sense) to compel God ; the colleague of angels, 
and is with them initiated into mysteries ; a most profound depth of 
knowledge, a habitation of celestial mysteries, a keeper of the Divine 
arcana, the health of men, a god over devils, a master of vices, an 
emperor of the body.” 

Go, sell , &c. You will ask, Why is poverty the appropriate way 
and instrument of evangelical perfection ? Bonaventura answers (in 
Apol. Pauperism ), because cupidity is the root of all evils. Cupidity, 
therefore, is the foundation of the city of Babylon. For of it are 
bom ambition, gluttony, and the rest of the vices. This cupidity 
Christ cuts down by poverty, and takes away riches, honours, delights, 
which are the food and fuel of all vices. For delicacies make the 
mind effeminate, and to become women rather than men. A manly 
strength abhors delicacies. 2. Poverty begets humility, which is the 
foundation of sanctity. Whence S. Francis, says Bonaventura, being 
asked by his disciples what virtue would most commend us to Christ 
the Lord, and make us pleasing to Him, replied (according to his 
wont) : Poverty ; for it is the way of salvation, the fount of humility, 
the root of perfection, and from it there spring many fruits, although 
they be hidden and known to but few. 3. One who is poor in spirit, 
since he has no other cares, gives himself wholly up to gathering 
virtues, as a bee to gathering honey. Thus S. Anthony, being free 
from the desire of riches, had an insatiable desire of virtues ; and so 
from one man he learned patience, from another abstinence, from 
another constancy, prayer, and so on. Hence the first poor religious 
were called Ascetics , that is, exercisers ; because they were wholly 
occupied in taming anger, gluttony and other passions, and in the 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


344 


S. MATTHEW, XIX. 


practice of arduous and heroic virtues. Whence some of them were 
accustomed to take food only once in two days, others only once in 
three. Others scarcely slept at all, like those who lived in the 
monastery of the Acemeta — of those who keep vigil without 
sleeping. 4. Because perfection consists in the love of God and 
our neighbour ; and to this poverty directs us. For it puts an end 
to meutn and tuum, from whence all the strifes and wars arise among 
neighbours, says S. Chrysostom. The same removes the mind away 
from all care and love of earthly things, and fixes it wholly upon 
God. For what the Apostle says concerning a married man (1 Cor. 
vii. 33), applies also to a rich man : “ He that is married cares for the 
things of the world, how he may please his wife,** and is divided. 
For the rich man is divided. He divides his cares and his thoughts 
between God and Mammon. Poverty, therefore, makes a man 
superior to the world and the flesh, like an angel conversing with 
angels, breathing after Heaven. And such a one fulfils the words of 
the Apostle, “ Seek those things which are above, not the things that 
are upon the earth,” that he may place his whole mind and love 
upon God, and may be made with Him, as it were, one spirit. Per- 
fection, therefore, consisteth in this — that the mind be altogether 
abstracted from transitory things, and fixed on what is good and 
eternal ; that is, on God, for which poverty affords an opportunity. 

You will say, for this it is sufficient to leave all things in affection, 
which was what Abraham did, not in act I answer with S. Jerome 
against Vigilantius. That is one grade of poverty, and a lower one. 
For the highest is to relinquish all things in reality, both because such 
a one gives all, that is to say both intention and its effect, as also 
because it is not possible wholly to relinquish a thing in intention, 
without carrying the intention into effect For like a person lying in 
a bed, or sitting in a chair, if any one should secretly bind him to 
the chair he does not know that he is bound, until he gets up : so 
those who possess riches have their affection hidden, by which they 
are bound to them, and do not perceive it until they lose them or 
leave them. Thus S. Gregory records ( Epist . ante lib. Moral.) how 
Jhe was deceived by the world. “ There was opened to me even then 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



PELAGTAN ERRORS. 345 

that I should seek for the eternal love, but persistent habit had 
prevailed so that I should not change my outward life.” 

Go, sell what thou hast. From hence the Pelagians taught that no 
rich man can be saved, unless he sell his property, and give to the 
poor, and become poor himself. S. Augustine writes against this 
view (Epist. 89. ad Hilar.), teaching that this is a counsel not a 
precept. Whence Pelagius was compelled to retract this error of his, 
as S. Augustine testifies (Epist. ad Paulin.). 

There are three tracts which have been recently printed, bearing 
the name of Pope S. Sixtus. The first is concerning riches, in which 
the writer would prove from this passage that a believer cannot be 
saved unless he relinquish them, and become poor. The second is 
concerning works ot faith, in which he teaches that they are necessary 
to salvation, but that they are works of free will, not of the grace of 
God The third concerning chastity, that it is a work of free will, 
not the gift of God. From all this it is plain that the author of 
this work is not S. Sixtus, but some Pelagian, as the Louvain doctors 
and others have rightly perceived. 

Sell that thou hast , and give to the poor : Mark and Luke add, 
all things whatsoever thou hast. By these words is refuted the error 
of Vigilanfius and Calvin, who teach that it is better and more 
perfect to keep one's nches, and use them in moderation, and 
give to the poor according as opportunity serves, than to relinquish 
them all at once. S. Jerome confutes this error, (lib. cont. Vigilant.). 
For as S. Ambrose says, “ It is better to give the tree with its fruit 
than to give the fruit only.” Again, the ascetic, who gives part ot 
his wealth to the poor, and keeps part for himself, is neither fish nor 
flesh : he neither renounces the world, nor is he a secular. He is a 
sort of amphibious animal. Whence S. Basil said to one who took 
up the religious life, but reserved certain things for himself, u Thou 
hast spoilt a senator, and not made a monk.” Such a person does not 
wholly trust in God, but partly in God, and partly in the riches 
which he keeps for himself. Whence he is not really and entirely 
poor in spirit, nor does he free himself from the care, distraction and 
temptation, which are wont to accompany riches. Wherefore S. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


S. MATTHEW, XIX. 


346 

Anthony commanded a certain person who wished to renounce the 
world after this sort, that he might reserve something for himself 
against a time of necessity, to place upon his naked body some 
pieces of flesh which he had bought When he had done this, the 
dogs and birds, which came to snatch at the flesh, lacerated his 
body all over. Then S. Anthony said, “ Thus shall they who do noi 
renounce all things be tom by the devils." (See Rufinus, in the Live > 
of the Fat/iers , lib. 3, n. 68.) Wherefore S. Hilarion, as S. Jerome 
testifies in his Life, rejected money offered him to distribute among 
the poor by Orion, out of whom he had cast a legion of devils, 
and said, “To many the name of poverty is an occasion of 
covetousness : but mercy has no art No one spends better than 
he who reserves nothing for himself." For as S. Leo wisely 
says about a like matter (Serm. 12, de Quadrages .), “Through 
lawful use we pass on to immoderate excess, when from care of the 
health there creeps in the delectation of pleasure ; and the desire of 
what is sufficient for nature does not satisfy.” S. Gregory gives the 
reason d priori {Horn. 20, in Ezech .), “When any one vows something 
that is his to God, and something does not vow, that is called sacrifice. 
But when a man vows all that he has, all that he lives, all that he 
knows, to Almighty God, then it is a holocaust. For there are some 
who as yet are retained in mind in this world, and who afford help 
to the poor from their possessions, and hasten to succour the 
oppressed. These in the good which they do, offer sacrifices, 
because of their actions they offer something to God, and keep 
something for themselves. And there are some who reserve 
nothing for themselves, but immolate senses, life, tongue, and 
the substance which they have received to Almighty God. What 
do these do but offer a holocaust, yea rather are made a 
holocaust ? ” 

To the poor : Christ does not say, Give to your relations, or rich 
friends, as Remigius observes. For this is an act of natural love, by 
which you do not cast away your riches, but deliver them to those 
who belong to you, to be kept. Wherefore in this way you do not 
leave the world, but rather immerse yourself further in it You must 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



THE THREEFOLD LIFE. 


347 


make an exception, when your relations according to their position 
are in need of your riches ; for then, they are reckoned poor in 
their own station. But give to the poor , from whom you expect 
nothing in return, but from God only. Therefore this is a pure act 
of charity and poverty, and renunciation of wealth. Origen adds, 
he who gives his goods to the poor is assisted by their prayers. 

And thou shalt have treasure, &c. By the word treasure , says 
Chrysostom, “ the abundance and the permanence of the recompense 
are shown.” And S. Hilary says, “ By the casting away of earthly 
riches heavenly wealth is purchased.” Beautifully does S. Augus- 
tine observe (Serm, 28, de Verb . Apost .), “ Great is the happiness of 
Christians, to whom it is given, to make poverty the price of the 
kingdom of Heaven. Let not thy poverty displease thee. Nothing 
richer can be found than it is. Would you know how wealthy it 
is ? It purchases Heaven. By what treasures could be conferred 
what we see granted to poverty ? That a rich man should come to 
the kingdom of Heaven with his possessions may not be : but he 
may get there by despising them.” Sell clay therefore, and buy 
Heaven : give a penny and procure a treasure. 

And come, follow Me: Journeying in poverty, and preaching the 
kingdom of God. “For many,” says S. Jerome, “even when they 
leave their riches do not follow the Lord. Neither does this suffice 
for perfection, unless after despising riches, they follow the Saviour ; 
that is, leave evil and do good. For the world is more easily set at 
nought than the will. Therefore do the words follow, Come and 
follow Me, Again, Folloiv Me implies the union of an active with a 
contemplative life. There is a threefold sort of holy life. The first 
and lowest is the active life. The second is the contemplative. The 
•third and most perfect is the union of action with contemplation, that 
what we derive from God by contemplation, we should afterwards 
teach to others. This was the life which Christ and His Apostles 
led. S. Ambrose gives the reason in his explanation of the title of 
the 39th Psalm. “Christ,” he says, “ is the end of all things, which 
with a pious mind, we ask for. For whether you seek for wisdom, or 
study virtue, or truth, or the way of justice, or the resurrection, in 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


348 


S. MATTHEW, XIX, 


all things you must follow Christ, who is the Power and the Wisdom 
of God : who is Truth, the Way, Justice, Resurrection. After whom 
therefore do you strive, but the perfection of all things, and the sum 
of virtues? And therefore He saith to thee, Come, follow Me, i.e., 
that thou mayest deserve to arrive at the consummation of virtues. 
Therefore he who follows Christ ought to imitate Him as closely as 
he can ; to meditate upon His precepts, and the Divine examples ot 
His deeds.” 

Observe that in this chapter Christ gives three chief evangelical 
counsels, viz., of celibacy and continence, ver. 12 : of poverty, when 
He says, Sell that thou hast , ver. 21 : of obedience, when He says. 
Follow Me, , i.e., obey Me and My command : imitate My obedience 
even unto death. 

Ver. 22. When the young man heard ’ &c. Wisely says S. Augus- 
tine (Epist. 43. ad Paulin), “ I know not how it is that when super- 
fluous earthly things are loved, the more acquired the more they 
bind. Wherefore did that young man depart in sorrow, except be- 
cause he had great riches? For it is one thing to be unwilling to 
incorporate with yourself what you have not ; it is another thing to 
tear away what has been incorporated. The former may be repudi- 
ated as something not belonging to you : divesting yourself of the 
latter is like cutting off your limbs.” In the Gospel according to 
the Hebrews which Origen cites, there is here a considerable addi- 
tion. It is as follows. “ Another of the rich men said unto Him, 
Master, what good thing shall I do that I may live? He saith 
unto him, Man, keep the Law and the Prophets. He answered 
Him, I have done this. He said unto him, Go and sell all that 
thou possessest, and divide amongst the poor, and come, follow Me. 
But the rich man began to scratch his head, and it pleased him 
not And the Lord said unto him, How sayest thou, I have kept 
the Law and the Prophets ? For it is written in the Law, Thou 
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself, and lo, many of thy brethren, 
the sons of Abraham, are clothed in filthy garments, and perish of 
hunger, and thy house is full of many good things, and there goeth 
not out of it anything whatsoever unto them. And He turned 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


THE NEEDLE^ EYE. 


349 


and said unto His disciple Simon, who was sitting by Him, — 
Simon, son of Jonah, it is easier for a camel to go through the 
eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of 
Heaven.” 

Verse 24. And again I say unto you , &c. The Arabic is, the 
entering of a camel into a needle's eye is more easy . And again , the 
Gr. TrhXiy 8i, i.e., but again. Christ, in giving this addition, as 
it were corrects what he has just said : “ I have said that it is a 
difficult thing for a rich man to be saved, now I add something 
more, that it is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle 
than for a rich man to enter Heaven.” By rich man , Remigius 
understands one who trusts in riches, who places all his hope in 
them, which is what many rich men da More simply you may take 
it to mean any rich person. 

You will ask, What is the meaning of camel in this passage, and* 
how could it pass through a needle's eye ? Some, with Theophylact, 
understand in Greek a sailor’s cable, which is aiqiqXoc, a camel. 
Some, with the Gloss, understand a gate of Jerusalem ; which, 
because it was very low, was called the camel, because it was neces- 
sary for him who entered through it to stoop down and bend like a 
cameL 

But I say that the tall and hump-backed animal, which is com- 
monly called a camel, is here meant So the Syriac, Arabic, Origen, 
SS. Hilary, Jerome, Chrysostom, and others, passim. Whence 
note that it was a proverb among the Jews, when they wished to 
signify that a thing was impossible, to say, “A camel will more 
easily pass through a needle’s eye, than such a thing will be.” 
Whence the Talmudists use such a proverb even now, as Caninius 
testifies (in nom. Hebr. N. Test.). Similar proverbs, signifying that a 
thing is impossible, are the following : “ More easily will a tortoise 
outstrip a hare.” “A wolf might take a sheep to wife first” “ A 
locust will bring forth an ox sooner.” “ A tortoise will vanquish an 
eagle.” “The earth will take to itself wings.” “ Rivers will run up- 
hill.” “ More easily might you hide an elephant under your arm.” 
“You will fly without wmgs first” “A beetle will more readily 


Digitized by e^ooQie 



350 


S. MATTHEW, XIX. 


make honey.” “ The sky will fall first” “ The sea will more easily 
produce vines.” “Words will be wanting to a woman sooner.” 
“ More easily may you feed on wind.” 

Moreover, there is an hyperbole here. That is called impossible 
which is exceedingly difficult. Whence, that a rich man should be 
saved, which Christ here says is impossible, in the verse preceding 
He said was difficult. As S. Jerome observes, “ Not impossibility is 
declared, but infrequency is shown.” So too Jansen, Maldonatus, 
and others. Thus, in the twelfth verse, He said, He that is able to 
receive it, let him receive it. It means, some cannot receive, i.e., with 
difficulty receive the counsel of celibacy. And Jeremiah says (xiii 
23) : " If the Ethiopian can change his skin, or the leopard his spots, 
so too may ye do good when ye have learnt evil.” ( Vulg.) And yet 
this might be done, though it would be difficult So it is as impos- 
sible — that is to say, difficult — for a rich man to be saved, as it 
would be for a camel to go through the eye of a needle. And yet, 
speaking absolutely, such a thing could take place : if, for example, 
the camel were cut up into the minutest particles, each one of which 
was passed separately, though slowly and laboriously, through the 
needle’s eye. Or if some needle were made great and thick, that it 
should be like a tower or a pyramid ; for then its eye would be ol 
sufficient size for a camel to pass through it whole. Lastly, Emanuel 
Sa, by the eye of a needle, understands what a needle has, or what a 
needle does, for it is possible to make with it by degrees an immense 
aperture. 

Again, you may take impossible here in a strict sense. For that 
a rich man should be saved is impossible with men : but it is possible 
with God, as Christ says in verse 26. That is to say, it is impossible 
by natural strength, but by the power of the grace given by God it 
is possible. Just as that a camel should pass through the eye 
of a needle is possible by the power of God. That this is 
possible with God is plain from a similar case; namely from the 
quantity of the body of Christ, which in the Eucharist is wholly 
contained in a very small Host, yea in every particle of it For if 
God is able to place the whole body of Christ in a particle of a 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


ALLEGORICALLY EXPLAINED. 35] 

consecrated Host, He is able also to make a camel pass through the 
eye of a needle. 

Appositely and elegantly says Francis Lucas, a rich man puffed up 
and swelling with his riches, on whose back great burdens of wealth 
are pressing is compared to a came/, and the strait gate, by which we 
must enter into life to the eye of a needle, that you may understand 
that those who abound in riches, and are swelling with pride and 
disdain in too great a degree to allow themselves to be reduced within 
those narrow bounds in which God confines His own people are 
meant I have given many analogies between a camel and a rich man 
in Ecclus. xiiL n. 

By this similitude of a camel and a needle Christ signifies that his 
riches are not so much an advantage to a rich man, as an 
impediment to virtue, and the kingdom of heaven. Wisely 
therefore did He counsel the young man that he should give his 
wealth to the poor, and as a poor man follow Christ who was poor. 

Mystically . Isaiah prophesied that camels , Le., rich men, laying 
aside by the grace of Christ the hump of their pride, would enter into 
the Church through the eye of a needle, i.e., through the straits of humility 
and the evangelical law (lx. 6). “The company of camels shall 
cover thee, the dromedaries of Midian and Eplia.” Hear S. Jerome, 
“ Such was thy mother Paula of saintly memory, and thy brother, 
Pammachias, who through the eye of a needle, that is by the strait 
and narrow way which leadeth unto life, passed, and with their 
burdens leaving the broad way, which leads to Tartarus, carried 
whatever they had as the Lord's gifts, according to the saying, “ the 
ransom of a man are his riches," for the things which are impossible 
with men are possible with God." 

Allegorically, S. Augustine {lib. a, quasi, cap. 47), and S. Gregory 
{lib. 35, Moral. 17), by camel understood Christ and by the needle, 
His Passion. Thus, it is more easy that Christ should suffer for the 
overs of the world, than for lovers of the world to be converted unto 
Christ Hear & Gregory, “ A camel passed through the eye of a 
needle when our Redeemer entered through the straitness of 
His Passion, even unto the enduring of death. This Passion 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



35 * 


S. MATTHEW, XIX. 


was like a needle, because it pricked His body with pain. But 
more easily could a camel pass through the eye of a needle than 
a rich man enter into the kingdom of heaven, because unless He had 
first shown unto us by His Passion the pattern of humility, by no 
means would our proud rigidity have bowed down." 

Symbolically and Aitagogically , Auctor Imperf. (apud. S. Chrysostom 
Horn. 33) says, “The souls of the Gentiles are likened unto crooked 
camels , in which was the hump of idolatry, because the knowledge 
of God is the lifting up of the soul. But the needle is the Son of 
God, of which the first part is subtle according to the Divinity : but 
the rest is thicker according to the Incarnation. But the whole is 
straight, and hath no bending, through the wound of whose Passion 
the Gentiles entered into life. With this needle the garment of im- 
mortality hath been sewed. It is the very needle which has sewed 
the flesh to the spirit This needle hath united the people of the 
Jews to the Gentiles. This needle hath brought about friendship 
between angels and men. It is easier then for the Gentiles to pass 
through the eye of the needle than for the rich Jews to enter into 
the kingdom of Heaven.” 

Ver. 25. When the disciples heard, & c. Because there were few, 
and at that time scarcely any, who did not wish to be rich. For all 
were gasping after lucre, even as many gasp after it now. For as S. 
Augustine says upon this passage, “ All who desire riches are counted 
among the rich.” 

Bui Jesus beheld Greek, eniPXtxpac. Jesus looking upon his dis- 
ciples, regarding them with a benign countenance, calmed the 
timidity and anxiety of their minds. So Chrysostom. With men : it is 
impossible to a rich man by human strength to obtain salvation, for 
he is entangled in his nches. And this salvation is a supernatural 
blessing, which we cannot obtain without similar supernatural powers 
of grace. But to God all things are possible, because God is the 
Author and the Fountain both of nature and grace and glory, and He 
so provides that by grace we should easily and gravely overcome all 
the difficulties and hindrances of nature : and, which pertains to the 
subject now in hand, He brings it about that rich men are not cor- 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



LEAVING ALL. 


353 


rupted by their riches, but use them well, yea, that not a few, for- 
saking them, are ambitious of, and follow the evangelical poverty 
of Christ Thus did all the first Christians, who had all things 
common. (Acts iv. 32.) 

Then answered Peter . Arabic, What then is nigh , that it may be 
to us 9 What 9 namely, of reward in Heaven, and glory in life 
eternal? Peter following Christ’s counsel of poverty, which the 
young man had despised, becoming more zealous, animates the 
Apostles, because they were almost alone in following the counsel 
of poverty given by Christ And that he might still further en- 
courage them, he asks what, and how great reward of glory awaits 
himself and the other Apostles, who followed Christ in His poverty 
in preaching the good news of the kingdom of Heaven? Thus 
Peter would confirm his companions in their holy purpose. 

We have left all Our ships and our nets, by which we gained our 
livelihood. And although these were poor and small things, yet, 
as S. Gregory says (Horn. 5, in Evang.), “he has forsaken much, 
who has left the desire of having. By those who followed Christ as 
many things were left as could be desired by those who followed 
him not” For the poor in spirit, although he may be reckoned 
among the needy, yet in a sense is he rich, because all the things 
which he might have, hope for, or obtain, all his life long in the world, 
yea, the whole world, he forsakes for the love of Christ, that he may 
give up his whole heart to God. This is an heroic act of poverty, 
and therefore of charity and religion in which a man offers himself 
as a whole burnt offering to God : yea he himself becomes a living 
and perpetual burnt offering. 

Hear S. Augustine. (In Psalm 104, Cone. 3.) “ Peter left not only 
what he had, but what he wished to have. For what poor person is 
there who is not puffed up by worldly hopes ? Who does not daily 
desire to increase his possessions ? That cupidity was cut of l Peter 
left the whole world, and Peter received the whole world. 4 Having 
nothing, and yet possessing all things.’” 

Jesus said unto them, & c. In the regeneration, i.e., in baptism. 
For this is spiritual regeneration, in which, dying unto sin, we are 
VOL. IL A A 


Digitized by Google 


354 


8. MATTHEW, XIX. 


boro into spiritual and heavenly life. Thus S. Hilary explains, “Ye 
who have followed Me through the regeneration of baptism, shall sit 
with Me as judges of the twelve tribes of Israel* But all other 
commentators, passim , understand by regeneration, the general 
resurrection in the Day of Judgment For this shall be the 
renovation of the body, and of the whole man as well as of the 
universe, and, as it were, their second birth to glory. Hence it is 
rightly called here and elsewhere Regeneration. Whence the Syriac 
renders, in the new world : the Arabic, in the generation to come. For 
then there shall be a new heaven and a new earth. ( Isaiah lxv. 17. 
Apoc. xxi 1. 2 Peter iil 13.) 

When the Son of Man shall sit, &c. In the seat of His majesty 
(Vulg.) ; of His glory (Arabic). S. Chrysostom, Theophylact, and 
Euthymius understand by session , judicial power. For judges sit in 
order that they may adjudicate calmly and tranquilly, without per- 
turbation or haste. This is true ; but over and above this, sitting in 
this place signifies properly that Christ will sit in judgment, and 
with Him the Apostles and those like them, and that on thrones of 
cloud, splendid and majestic, but each according to his merit and 
dignity. Whence Sacred Scripture ordinarily attributes a seat and 
sitting to Christ in judgment For sitting under such circumstances 
is common to all nations, and is the natural posture of judges. So 
Maldonatus. But Jansen and some others deny this, who say that 
the proper posture of the glorified body such as Christ has, is 
standing rather than sitting. But both postures are appropriate to 
the glorified body — viz., standing for fighting, and sitting for judg- 
ment 

Ye shall sit, &c. Richard Victor {Tract, de potest, fudiciar.) and 
others think that these things were promised by Christ to the 
Apostles alone, because they were His first followers. As though 
He had said, “ Each of you twelve shall have his throne in the 
judgment;* even Judas, says Chrysostom, if he persevere in his 
vocation. But others, with more probability, think that these pro- 
mises were made also to the followers of the Apostles, such as 
religious, who leaving all things to preach the Gospel, come nearest 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



TWELVE THRONES: A DEFINITE — 355 

to Christ and His Apostles. A definite number, then, is placed here 
for an indefinite one, viz., twelve for all. For Christ speaks to His 
twelve Apostles, but in such a manner as to address their followers. 
For they who have equal labour with Apostles, will deserve equal 
honour with them. Christ therefore promises these judicial seats to 
those who leave all things, and follow Him in preaching the Gospel 
This is what religious do, especially such as devote themselves to 
win souls. Whence S. Bernard says (Serm. de Ingratitud .) : We 
have all made profession of the Apostolic life. Hence Nazianzen 
(Oral, in Julian, i) shows that it is the privilege of monks to sit on 
thrones. S. Augustine (in Ps. 87) proves this. “ For if there were 
to be twelves thrones only, Paul, the thirteenth Apostle, would have 
no throne ; and he would not be able to judge who said, nevertheless, 
that he should judge not men only, but even angels. Not only, then, 
those twelve, and the Apostle Paul, but as many as shall judge per- 
tain to the twelve thrones, on account of the general signification.* 9 
And S. Bernard says (Serm. de S. Benedict .) : “ Altogether just is the 
retribution that they who here for Christ’s sake have forsaken the 
glory of human majesty, should there be glorified by Christ and sit 
with Him in an especial manner as judges. But let no one think 
that only the twelve Apostles (for instead of Judas, who transgressed 
Matthias was chosen) shall at that time be judges ; for as neither are 
there twelve tribes only of Israel to be judged, for otherwise the 
tribe of Levi, which was the thirteenth, would be unjudged ; and 
Paul — who was the thirteenth Apostle — would, perchance, be 
deprived of judging ; whereas he says himself : 4 Know ye not 
that we shall judge angels?’ We must understand, therefore, that 
all who, after the example of the Apostles, have left all things and 
followed Christ, shall come as judges with Him, even as all men 
shall be judged : for because by the number twelve, in Scripture, 
totality is often understood ; by the twelve thrones of the Apostles 
the entire number of all who judge, and by the twelve tribes of 
Israel the entire number of those who are to be judged is shown.” 
S. Thomas demonstrates the same thing at length (Tract, cant, retra - 
hent. a Relig. caps. 6 6* 7), where he teaches that this session is pro- 

a a a 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



S. MATTHEW, XIX 


3S« 

mised to evangelical poverty. And he proves from hence how 
sublime and pleasing to God this poverty is, forasmuch as it excels 
other virtues, and merits this lofty judicial power. S. Gregory gives 
the reason (. Mora *. 26, 20), when, interpreting that passage in Job. 
xxx vi. — He hath given judgment for the poor — he says : “ The more 
they were despised in this world through their great humility, so 
much the more, when they receive their thrones, do they grow in the 
height of power.” 

Wherefore deservedly does S. Bernard, admiring this their ex- 
cellency, exclaim (Serm. 8, in Ps. Qui habitat), “O grace of friendship, 
O summit of honour, O privilege of confidence, O prerogative of 
perfect security! For what is so much to be feared? What is so full 
of anxiety and vehement solicitude as the thought ot standing to be 
judged at that awful tribunal, and to wait for the sentence as yet 
doubtful, from so strict a Judge ?” And after a little, he says, “ Happy 
indeed the position, which in that supreme clashing of the elements, 
in that tremendous examination of deserts, in that so great scrutiny 
of judging, can make them not secure only but glorious.” Moreover 
this glorious judicial session before the whole world, yea of the whole 
world, is promised by Christ to all those, who leaving all things, follow 
by means of perfect imitation, Christ who was poor, as poor, and 
spread His Gospel, and His kingdom. 

The expression therefore, ye shall sit, implies, 1. The security of 
those who are poor for the Gospel’s sake. 2. The privilege ot 
judging. 3. Dignity and eminence above others. 4. The nearest 
place to Christ and most perfect union with Him. 5. A principality 
of grace, happiness and glory, that inasmuch as they are princes of 
the kingdom of heaven, they should have the right of judging, 
and of admitting into it those who are worthy, and excluding the 
unworthy. 

Tropologically , Auctor Imperfeeti, by this session and judicial power 
understands that there is promised to those who leave all things and 
follow Christ a dominion of hearts, so that they may rule over the 
hearts and minds of men, and place in them the throne and kingdom 
of Christ where they may sit, and rute like kings, and make all things 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



frok AH INDEFINITE NUMBER. 


35 ? 


therein obedient to the law of Christ. Wherefore Apostles and 
Apostolic men, leaving all things, as monks and religious have 
done, being inflamed with the love of God, have converted the 
world, as Jerome Platus shows (lib, 2, de bono stab. Relig . c. 30). 
For says Auctor Imperfecti , “ all who receive Christ into themselves 
by believing in and perfectly following Him, are the thrones of His 
majesty.” And, “ whosoever shall receive the word of Peter becomes 
the throne of Peter, and Peter sits in him.” 

Judging the twelve tribes , not only by comparison with the wicked, 
as SS. Jerome and Chrysostom, Euthymius, and Auctor Imperfecti 
explain, as the Queen of the South and the Ninevites are said to be 
about to condemn the Jews in the day of judgment, that is to say, 
by their example, because they repented at the preaching of Jonah, 
whereas the Jews would not repent at the preaching of Christ Nor 
yet even merely by approbation of the sentence of Christ in which 
manner all the saints shall judge : but much more honourably and 
gloriously, as it were nobles and princes of the heavenly kingdom, 
sitting upon their own thrones as assessors with Christ, as cardinals 
with the pope. They shall in truth judge, and pass the same 
sentence as Christ by which they shall assign the just to heaven, the 
unjust to hell, rebuking and reproving those who despised their 
doctrine and the example of their holy life, and praising those who 
cherished and honoured both. 

Twelve tribes of Israel: understand not the twelve tribes of Israel 
only, as some expound, but likewise all nations. 

Where observe, twelve tribes are spoken of, although the tribe of 
Joseph, being divided into two — Ephraim and Manasseh — whom 
Jacob adopted as his own sons, and made them equal in the rights 
of succession and inheritance with them (and according to this 
computation the tribe of Levi would not be the twelfth but the thir- 
teenth) ; yet if we look at the origin of the tribes from the Patriarchs, 
the sons of Jacob, there were but twelve. 

Observe 2. These twelve tribes were formerly the elect and faithful 
people of God, yea, the Church of God, even in the time of Christ 
Yea this was the kingdom of Israel promised to Messiah. Whence 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



358 


S. MATTHEW, XIX. 


the nations who believed in Christ were, as it were, grafted into this 
Church and people of the Jews, and as it were endowed with its 
rights of citizenship, so that they were no longer Gentiles but Jews 
that is, confessing and believing, \ and Israelites , i.e,, having power with 
God, as the Apostle teaches (Romans ii. 29). Hence too S. John 
(Apoc. xxL 13.), says that he saw the names of the twelve tribes 
of Israel inscribed on the gates of the heavenly Jerusalem. All 
Christians, therefore, of all nations are divided and distributed among 
the twelve tribes of Israel, in such manner that some are reckoned 
to belong to the tribe of Judah, others to the tribe of Joseph, others 
to the tribe of Levi, and so on, according to the diversity of their vir- 
tues and professions. To Judah pertain magistrates, kings and 
princes. To Joseph pertain virgins, the chaste and celibates. For 
such a one was Joseph before his elevation. To Levi, pertain 
priests and deacons, and religious. 

Note 3. Unbelieving nations do not properly pertain to the 
twelve tribes of Israel, who are the faithful Wherefore by this 
omission of the unbelievers it is tacitly intimated that they will not 
be judged in the Day of Judgment ; “ for he that believeth not is 
judged already" (John iii. 18). This must be understood of the 
judgment of a doubtful issue, for in this way only will believers be 
judged. For of them there can be doubt whether they will be 
saved or damned, which doubt will be resolved by an examination 
of the works of each. For in another view, the unbelieving also will 
appear and be judged in the Day of Judgment, and be awarded 
greater or less punishment in hell, according to their demerits. 
This is allowed by all, and is plain from Joel iii. 2, and Matthew 
xxv. 32. 

Verse 29 — And every one that hath forsaken houses , &c. Observe 
that in the several clauses of this sentence the disjunctive conjunc- 
tion, or, is put because Christ is not speaking now of those who 
have left everything to follow Him, but of those who have only left 
some things for His sake and the Gospel's. So Origen, S. Jerome, 
Maldonatus. S. Chrysostom is of a different opinion, and thinks 
that the same thing is here promised by Christ to all the faithful 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



THE HUNDREDFOLD. 


359 


which a little previously He had promised to the twelve Apostles, 
As though He had said, All the faithful who have acted in the same 
way as the twelve Apostles, by forsaking all things and following 
Me, shall receive the same honour with them, and shall obtain one 
of the twelve thrones among the Apostles, and on it shall judge the 
twelve tribes of Israel But the previous explanation is the best, as 
being required by the disjunctive conjunction, or. 

Who hath left house : either because he has been despoiled of 
his house, and been driven into exile by a tyrant ; or because he 
has voluntarily given up his house on account of the scandals and 
temptations which he hath found in it ; or because he hath left his 
house and fled to a monastery, or church, in order to give himself up 
entirely to the service of God I say the same thing concerning 
brethren, sisters, father, mother, wife, children; for when they 
are unbelieving and wicked, they make it their business to draw 
a believer away from faith and righteousness. Wherefore, if a wife 
draw away her husband from faith and piety, Christ advises the hus- 
band to be divorced from her ; for it is better to desert a wife than 
to desert Christ But voluntarily they leave the same who from zeal 
for the more perfect life, flee to the cloisters. This is the meaning 
of for My Name's sake; i.e ., for the sake of Me and My love and 
reverence, that they may better and more fully serve Me. 

Shall receive (Gr. UaromnrXaolovd) a hundredfold — viz., of each ; 
that instead of one house which he has left for the sake of Christ he 
should receive a hundred, for one brother a hundred brethren, and 
so on. The Syriac is, one in to a hundred , i.e. t augmented a hundred 
per cent Thus also the Egyptian, Arabic, Ethiopic and Persian, 
which generally agree among themselves, especially the Ethiopic with 
the Persian, and the Egyptian with the Arabic. A hundredfold here 
means many times more , as Luke as it A definite number is put for 
an indefinite, in order that the vast magnitude of the compensation 
may be signified. 

You will ask, what sort of a recompense is this which is promised 
to those who have left their possessions for Christ ? i. The Chiliasts 
or Millenarians by a hundredfold understand a thousand years, with 


Digitized by Google 


$. MATtHEW, XtiL 


360 

which these saints after the General (communis) Resurrection* shall be 
delighted in this world, and shall enjoy all sorts of pleasures. But this 
is an error which I have confuted in Apoc. xx. And what Mark 
says is repugnant to this (x. 30), Receive a hundred times as much now 
in this present time. Hear S. Jerome, “ By reason of this sentence, 
some introduce a thousand years after the Resurrection, and say, then 
there shall be restored to us a hundred times as many of all the 
things which we have forsaken \ and also eternal life. They do not 
perceive if in other things the recompense were becoming, it would 
be something shameful in the matter of wives, that he who had for- 
saken one wife for the Lord’s sake, should receive a hundred wives 
in the time to come.” 

2. S. Gregory (Horn. 18 in Ezech .) says, “ He shall receive a hun- 
dredfold, because God shall take care, that such a one shall rejoice 
far more in his poverty, or his renunciation of his goods for the love 
of Christ, than rich men rejoice in all their riches and advantages.” 
And this, these who give up their possessions for Christ’s sake do in 
very deed experience. 

3. S. Jerome, Bede, and others, take a hundredfold to apply not 
to temporal, but to spiritual goods, such as peace, joy, Divine conso- 
lations, and all other gifts and graces, with which God comforts them, 
and which He heaps upon them. These things surpass all earthly 
goods and joys, far more than a hundred exceeds unity. But 
because Mark particularly explains a hundred times as many , by adding, 
houses y brethren , sisters , mothers, children, and lands . Hence, 

4. And more correctly, Origen, Theophylact, Euthymius, and 
Cassian explain the hundredfold thus, that the man who forsakes his 
possessions and friends for Christ’s sake, shall find that Christ will 
take care that he has a hundred, />., very many others, who will give 
him the love and help of brothers, wives and mothers, with far more 
exceeding sweetness and charity; so that it shall not seem that he has 


* If by communis k Lapide means, as I suppose he does, the General Resurrec- 
tion, he is certainly mistaken in attributing this opinion to the Chiliasts, or 
Millenarians, 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


SPlRlttfAL fclNDRfcfl. 


3 «» 

lost his own possessions, but has only laid them down, and in Christ’s 
providence has multiplied them with great usury. For spiritual 
affections are sweeter than natural ones. Wherefore he who has left 
one home for Christ will find a hundred and more homes of pious 
people open and ready to receive him with love and gladness. 
Priests and those who flee from their homes on account of the per- 
secution in Japan, England and Scotland know this by experience. 
They find the houses of all the faithful open to receive them to hos- 
pitality, and are frequently migrating from house to house. So too 
a religious, who has left one house of his father for Christ finds a 
hundred, not houses, but colleges and monasteries, very great and 
fair to receive him with maternal tenderness. So also he who has 
left one field for Christ will find a hundred fields of the worshippers 
of Christ by which he may be nourished, and that without labour, 
or toil, whereas he would have had to cultivate his own. In like 
manner for one brother forsaken, there will be very many Christians 
who will cherish him with fraternal love, and cleave to him more 
sweetly with spiritual attachment For one sister, very many maidens 
will chastely love him, and attend to his wants like a brother. In- 
stead of one father, very many elders will cherish him as a son. For 
one mother, very many matrons will supply his necessities with 
maternal care. For one wife, a hundred wives of others, united to 
him in chaste spiritual bonds will be ready by means of themselves 
and others to care for him in sickness, and attend to his wants just 
as lovingly as though they were his own wives. Lastly, instead of a 
single son or a daughter, innumerable children will revere him as a 
father, and hang upon his sound doctrine and counsels, from whom 
his mind will derive greater pleasure than he could fronr his own 
children. This is what S. Augustine says from Solomon {epist. 89, 
quasi. 4) : “ The whole world is the riches of the faithful.” Cas- 
sian teaches the same thing (Collat. uit . cap. viL). The Aposdes 
had experience of this hundredfold , and so had the early Christians, 
in the fervour of the Primitive Church, concerning whom Paul says, 
“ having nothing, and yet possessing all things.” Also Luke, Acts 
iv. 3a. "And the multitude of them that believed were of one 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



3^2 


S. MATTHEW, XIX. 


heart and of one soul : neither said any of them that ought of the 
things which he possessed was his own ; but they had all things 
common.” And by and by, “ Neither was there any among them 
that lacked : for as many as were possessors of lands or Houses, 
sold them, and brought the prices of the things that were sold. And 
laid them down at the Apostles’ feet : and distribution was made to 
every man according as he had need.” This is experienced even 
now by good religious. And even if at any time it falls out otherwise, 
and they are in want of anything for the body, then God supplies 
the corporeal deficiency, and compensates for it by abundance of 
spiritual gifts and joys. 

There was a famous example of this in the philosopher Peregrinus, 
who pretended to be a Christian, and as such in a time of persecu- 
cution offered himself to be put in prison, that he might enjoy the 
assistance and the money of Christians who succoured him. Nor 
was he mistaken in his opinion. For the Christians vied with one 
another in helping him, and the impostor went back to his own 
country laden with gold, as Lucian relates, in Pcrcgrino. 

Lastly, S. Ambrose (in Ps . cxix. lit. Cheth.\ by a hundredfold \ 
understands God Himself, and consequently the whole world, which 
is God’s property. For to such as leave all things for God’s sake, 
God is father, mother, wife, brother, sister, and all things. “Be- 
cause,” says S. Ambrose, “he who has left all things begins to 
possess God, and He is, as it were, the perfect reward of virtues, 
which is reckoned not by the enumeration of a hundredfold, but by 
the estimation of perfect virtue.” He adduces the example of the 
tribe of Levi, which — because, by the Lord’s command, it had no 
portion of the land among the other tribes — the Lord Himself pro- 
mised, and constantly confirmed it, that He would be its portion and 
inheritance. Whence he concludes with this golden sentence : “ He 
who has God for his portion is the possessor of all nature. Instead 
of lands, he is sufficient to himself having good fruit, which cannot 
perish. Instead of houses, it is enough for him that there is the 
habitation of God, and the temple of God, than which nothing can 
be more precious. For what is more precious than God? That is 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


S. FRANCIS TO HIS BRETHREN. 


3«3 


the portion which no earthly inheritance can equal. What is more 
magnificent than the celestial host? What more blessed than 
Divine possession?” And Cassian says: 41 Instead of that joy 
which any one had in the possession of a single field or house, he 
shall enjoy a hundredfold more the delight of riches, who passing 
into the adoption of the sons of God, shall possess as his own all 
things which belong to the Eternal Father, and in effect and virtue 
(following the example of His True Son) shall proclaim, 4 All things 
that the Father hath are Mine ; 9 and now no more with any penal 
care of distraction or anxiety, but secure and joyful he cometh, 
as it were, everywhere to his own, hearing daily what the Apostle 
preaches — 4 All things are yours, whether things present, or things 
to come.*” This, therefore, is the congruous and condign reward of 
poverty — that having nothing, nothing should be wanting to it, but 
that it should possess all things. S. Francis experienced this, and 
exhorted his brethren to it 44 Dearest sons,” he said, 44 great and 
unspeakable are the kindnesses of our God toward us, who thus 
turns the hearts of the faithful towards us His humble and worthless 
servants. From what we have received we daily hope for what we 
are to receive. Cast, therefore, your care upon the Lord, and He 
will nourish you on this mountain (. Aivemia ), Who sustained Elias 
in the wilderness, Antony and Paul in the desert Know this of a 
surety, that there is no more secure refuge for the relief of our neces- 
sities than to have nothing. For if we be truly and evangelically 
poor, the world will have compassion upon us, and feed us abundantly. 
But if we are false to poverty, the world will forsake us ; and if we 
ward off indigence by unlawful means, we shall endure worse 
penury.” (So Wadding, in Annul . Mirtorum, a.c 1212, num. 14.) 
Mark adds, that this hundredfold will be given with persecutions 
(x. 30). How this is I have there explained. 

Tropologically . Cassian, in the place already cited, asserts that the 
joy of the converted in virtue is a hundred times as great as it was 
before in cupidity and vice ; and he says, “ If instead of the pertur- 
bation of anger and fury, you weigh the perpetual calmness of the 
mind; for the torment of anxiety and distraction, the quiet of security; 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



3^4 


S. MATtHEW, XI 


for the fruitless and penal sadness of this world, the fruit of sorrow 
unto salvation ; for the vanity of worldly joy, the richness of spiritual 
delight ; you will perceive that the recompense of such an exchange 
is a hundredfold 7 

Analogically, S. Anthony, S. Athanasius testifies in his Life, 
understands by hundredfold the kingdom of Heaven, in which there 
are a hundred times more good things than there are on earth. 
“ He who hath left,” he said, “ the dominion of the whole world 
shall receive a hundredfold better rewards in the kingdom above.” 
Instead of transitory things, those which are steadfast shall be given 
him ; for woithless, things excellent , great things instead of small ; 
heavenly for earthly; divine for human; things eternal for those of a 
moment 

And shall inherit, &c. Syriac, shall possess in inheritance. Arabic, 
shall become the heir of eternal life . This is the most ample inheri- 
tance, in which the blessed are heirs of God, and joint heirs with 
Christ. Therefore they shall possess not only earth and Heaven, and 
all things which in them are, but even God Himself ; and every 
honour, all riches, all glory, all sweetness, all delights, all joys, and 
in short, all good things in God ; and that, not as having the mere 
usufruct, but as heirs and masters, with perpetual inheritance, to 
endure for ever, so long as God shall be God. All this is involved 
and signified in the expression, eternal life . Moreover all who keep 
the commandments of God shall inherit this eternal life, as Christ 
hath said, ver. 17. They however shall possess it in a more full 
and glorious degree, who have united counsels to precepts. Whence 
in this place Christ promises and assigns it to such only. By this 
manner of speaking He tacitly intimates that it is a difficult thing to 
attain eternal life by the observance of precepts only, without keep- 
ing the counsels. For the one is hard without the other. It is 
difficult to keep all the commands of God, unless the counsels, 
especially that of poverty, be observed. For, as Christ says (ver. 23), 
it is difficult, and as it were impossible for a rich man to be saved 

Verse 30. But many that are first, Sir Observe how appositely Christ 
subjoins these words to what He had previously said. For He Himself 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


WHO ARE “THE LAST?” 


3^5 


has through almost the whole of this chapter, opposed Himself and 
His grace and the counsels of the Gospels, to the Pharisees and the 
Old Law. Whence He here, by consequence, opposes its reward to 
His reward, as will be plain in the next chapter. But He has especial 
reference to what He had spoken immediately before concerning the 
twelve judicial thrones; concerning the hundredfold; concerning the lijc 
eternal And He appears to answer a tacit objection of the Apostles. 
For they might have said within themselves, “ How shall this be, that 
we who are vile, poor, ignorant, ignoble, should sit on twelve thrones, 
judging the twelve tribes of Israel, when there are in them very many 
men eminent in dignity, wealth, learning, fame, authority, such as the 
Scribes and Pharisees, and that young ruler, who was also a keeper 
of the Law ? ” Christ meets this objection, and declares that they 
indeed are eminent, and the first in this world, but that in Heaven 
and the life eternal they will be the last. That is, they would find 
no place there, they will be rejected and excluded from it. He used 
a like mode of expression (v. 19), “ Whoso shall break one of these 
least commandments, shall be called the least, *>., not at all in the 
kingdom of Heaven.” And the last are called here the most remote 
from the kingdom of Heaven, as is plain from Luc. xiii. 30. This was 
because they despised Christ as being a poor man. But the Apostles, 
and others like them, who left all to follow Christ, who seemed in this 
world the poorest and the least of men, were to be the first in the life 
eternal , forasmuch as they were most dear to Christ, the King ot 
Heaven, and most like Him in life and character, especially in 
poverty and zeal in preaching. So S. Jerome, Bede, S. Thomas, and 
others ; also Victor Antioch (in cap. x. Marci.). Now He saith many 
not all, because there are some first here, who shall be first also in 
Heaven, such as holy kings, princes, doctors, bishops, pontiffs, who 
although they abound in wealth, yet are poor in spirit And in turn 
there are some who are last here who shall be also last in Heaven, 
such as paupers and beggars, who give themselves up to theft and 
rapine in order to supply their wants, and that they may become rich 
and opulent. 

On the whole, by this saying Christ signifies that the rich, and 


Digitized by Google 



366 


8. MATTHEW, XIX. 


those who pant after earthly good, shall be shut out of Heaven ; bat 
the poor who covet heavenly things shall be the first then. He 
refers to what He said to the rich young man (ver. ai) : If thou wilt 
he perfect , go and sell what thou hast ; and give to the poor , and thou 
shalt have treasure in Heaven. Also to Peter's words : Lo, we have 
left all and followed Thee ; what shall we have therefore 9 Thus 
Christ in Heaven is the first. Who on earth was the last, according 
to the words in Isaiah liii. : “ We saw Him, and there was no come- 
liness ; we desired Him, Who was despised and the last of men.’ 9 
( Vulg .) See what is there said. Next to Christ is the Blessed 
Virgin, who, after Christ, was the last among men. The Apostles 
follow, of whom Paul spake (i Cor. iv. 9, 13) : “ For I think that 
God hath set forth us the Apostles last, as it were appointed to 
death ; for we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, 
and to men. • • . Being defamed, we intreat ; we are made as the 
filth of the earth, and are the offscouring of all things unto this 
day.” Thus concerning S. Martin the Church sings: u Martin is 
received with joy into Abraham’s bosom. Martin, the poor and 
lowly, enters Heaven rich. He is honoured with celestial hymns." 
There was seen in Heaven by a certain holy man a lofty and 
glorious throne, and as he was wondering for whom it was designed, 
he heard the words, “ This seat is kept for the lowly Francis.” 

Lastly, many Fathers and scholastic Doctors — whom I will cite on 
the first verse of the following chapter — take the words first and 
last as applying strictly and literally to eternal life. In this manner : 
Rich men who here below have led an honest but comfortable life, 
keeping only the precepts of God, in Heaven shall be the last; 
but the poor men, who to the precepts have added evangelical 
counsels, and in poverty have followed Christ in preaching the 
Gospel, shall be the first in Heaven. I have said more about this 
in the following chapter. The meaning will be more ample with a 
more complete application to all that is said in the parable which 
follows, if you take last in both ways — viz., as signifying those who 
are to be excluded from Heaven, as well as those who are last in 
Heaven. For the Apostles, who as first shall judge the twelve 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



WHO ARE "THE FIRST?* 


3^7 


tribes of Israel, as it were the last, shall award to many of them, as 
being just, the kingdom of Heaven, and to many as being unjust, 
hell. Moreover this sentence, many that are first shall be last, and 
the last first, Christ explains by the subsequent parable of the labourers. 
This sentence is, as it were, the proparable, #>., the title and argument 
of that parable, to which is annexed the post-parable, as it were the 
scope and application of the parable (xx. 16). Thus the last shall be 
first, and the first last; for many at t called, but few chosen . Whence 
it is plain that the post-parable exactly corresponds to the proparable, 
indeed that it is one and the same thing with it The first therefore 
are called the chosen, or the elect: but the called only, not the elect* are 
called the lost. 


Digitized by Google 



368 


CHAPTER XX. 

I Christ by the similitude of the labourers in the vineyard \ sheweth that Gad is 
debtor unto no man : 1 7 foretelleth his passion : 20 by answering the mother 

of Zebededs children teacheth his disciples to be lowly : 30 and giveth two blind 
men their sight, 

F OR the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an householder, which 
went out early in the morning to hire labourers into his vineyard. 

2 And when he had agreed with the labourers for a penny a day, he sent them 
into his vineyard. 

3 And he went out about the third hour, and saw others standing idle in the 
market place. 

4 And said unto them ; Go ye also into the vineyard, and whatsoever is right 1 
will give you. And they went their way. 

5 Again he went out about the sixth and ninth hour, and did likewise. 

6 And about the eleventh hour he went out, and found others standing idle, and 
saith unto them, Why stand ye here all the day idle ? 

7 They say unto him, Because no man hath hired us. He saith unto them. Go 
ye also into the vineyard ; and whatsoever is right, that shall ye receive. 

8 So when even was come, the lord of the vineyard saith unto his steward, Call 
the labourers, and give them their hire, beginning from the last unto the first 
9 And when they came that were hired about the eleventh hour, they received 
every man a penny. 

10 But when the first came, they supposed that they should have received more; 
and they likewise received every man a penny. 

1 1 And when they had received it, they murmured against the goodman of the 
house, 

12 Saying, These last have wrought but one hour, and thou hast made them 
equal unto us, which have borne the burden and heat of the day. 

13 But he answered one of them, and said, Friend, I do thee no wrong : didst 
not thou agree with me for a penny t 

14 Take that thine is, and go thy way : I will give unto this last, even as unto 
thee. 

15 Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? Is thine eye evil, 
because I am good ? 


Digitized by 


Google 


369 

16 So the last shall be first, and the first last : for many be called, but few 
chosen. 

17 If And Jesus going up to Jerusalem took the twelve disciples apart in the 
way, and said unto them, 

18 Behold, we go up to Jerusalem ; and the Son of man shall be betrayed unto 
the chief priests and unto the scribes, and they shall condemn him to death, 

19 And shall deliver him to the Gentiles to mock, and to scourge, and to crucify 
Aim : and the third day he shall rise again. 

20 T Then came to him the mother of Zebedee’s children with her sons, wor- 
shipping Aim , and desiring a certain thing of him. 

21 And he said unto her, What wilt thou ? She saith unto him, Grant that 
these my two sons may sit, the one on thy right hand, and the other on the left, 
in thy kingdom. 

22 But Jesus answered and said, Ye know not what ye ask. Are ye able to 
drink of the cup that I shall drink of, and to be baptized with the baptism that 
I am baptized with ? They say unto him, We are able. 

23 And he saith unto them, Ye shall drink indeed of my cup, and be baptized 
with the baptism that I am baptized with : but to sit on my right hand, and on my 
left, is not mine to give, but it sAall be given to tAem for whom it is prepared of my 
Father. 

24 And when the ten heard it, they were moved with indignation against the 
two brethren. 

25 But Jesus called them unto Aim , and said, Ye know that the princes of the 
Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great exercise authority 
upon them. 

26 But it shall not be so among you : but whosoever will be great among you, 
let him be your minister ; 

27 And whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant : 

28 Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, 
and to give his life a ransom for many. 

29 And as they departed from Jericho, a great multitude followed him. 

30 If And, behold, two blind men sitting by the way side, when they heard 
that Jesus passed by, cried out, saying, Have mercy on us, O Lord, thou son of 
David. 

31 And the multitude rebuked them, because they should hold their peace : 
but they cried the more, saying, Have mercy on us, O Lord, thou son of David. 

32 And Jesus stood still, and called them, and said, What will ye that I shall 
do unto you ? 

33 They say unto him, Lord, that our eyes may be opened. 

34 So Jesus had compassion on them , and touched their eyes : and immediately 
their eyes received sight, and they followed him. 

The kingdom of Heaven is like . That is, God acts in the king- 
dom of Heaven like a master hiring labourers into his vineyard ; 
for strictly speaking, the kingdom of Heaven is not like the house- 
holder himself, but like his house and family. 

Christ’s purpose is by means of this parable to prove the truth of 

VOL. IL B B 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



k MAlTHfcW, XX. 


5)0 

His last saying in the preceding chapter, many that are first shall 
be last y &c., and to shew that by the grace of God, without any 
injustice or injury to anyone it will come to pass that those who 
here seemed to have the first place will in the Day of Judgment 
have the last, and those who seemed to have the last will then have 
the first; that is, that the Apostles and the despised faithful who 
followed Christ will in the kingdom of Heaven be preferred to the 
Scribes and Pharisees ; and the believing Gentiles to the Jews, who 
were called by the Lord that they might obtain the first place in 
the kingdom of God, that is, in the Church both militant and 
triumphant ; or, that the Sons of the New Testament, and especially 
the Apostles who are to sit on twelve thrones in the Day of Judg- 
ment, will be preferred to the Sons of the Old Testament, who 
under the shadows of legal sacrifices performed a laborious service, 
because, trusting to the works of the Law, they falsely claimed the 
kingdom of God for themselves, and rejected Christ Whence they 
deservedly lost the kingdom ; while the others submitted with 
humility to Christ, and zealously co-operated with Him, and therefore 
were elected in preference to the Jews both to grace and glory. That 
this is the scope of the parable is evident i. From the saying 
which precedes and follows it, many that are first , &c. 2. From S. 

Luke, who in chap, xiii., 29, 30, explains these same words of the 
admission of the Gentiles and the exclusion of the Jews. 3. Because 
otherwise we cannot explain the murmuring of those who were first 
called, for in Heaven among the blessed there is no murmuring, but 
only in hell among the damned. 

By the vineyard we are to understand the Church ; by the market 
place the world ; by those called at the first, third, and sixth hour, 
the Jews, called in their fathers, Abraham, Jacob, and Moses, to the 
faith and worship of God; by those called at the eleventh hour, 
we are to understand the Gentiles ; by the evening, the Day of Judg- 
ment, in which each will receive his reward, either already given in 
this life (as it was given to the Jews), or to be then given, as in the 
case of the Gentiles in Heaven. 

By the penny (denarius) is signified a whole da/s pay. The 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



VARIOUS DENARII. 


371 


denarius was a common coin, of which there were many different 
kinds ; for there was the copper, the silver, and the gold denarius. 
And it is clear that the pay given to the labourers was unequal, 
because the last were preferred to the others who came at the first, 
third, and sixth hour, for although the latter had laboured for a 
longer time, yet the former had laboured with greater grace, diligence 
and zeal. 

You will say then, that to the greater labourer the less reward is 
given. I answer : True, but not to the greater merit; for to this a 
greater reward is always due, and is always given. Moreover, it is 
not the greater labourer that makes the merit greater, but grace, and 
co-operation with grace. The Apostles had greater grace than the 
Scribes, Christians than Jews, and co-operated more with grace, and 
therefore the greater denarius, /.<?., the greater reward was promised 
them. For to the Jews the denarius promised by God was a tem- 
poral reward, an abundance of temporal blessings ; but to the Gen- 
tile Christians was promised by Christ a denarius far more noble, 
namely eternal life. The Jews therefore received a denarius of 
copper or silver, the Christians one of gold. For otherwise if the 
denarius signified exactly the same reward, it would not agree with 
the words which precede and follow the parable — the first shall be last \ 
and the last first 

In a word, the parable signifies that the Gentiles who believe in 
Christ will be preferred to the Jews who despise Christ. And this 
is what S. Paul teaches in many places, and especially in his Epistle 
to the Romans. And Christ Himself says, The publicans and harlots 
go into the Kingdom of God before you. (See also S. Matt viii, 
11, 12, and S. Luke xiii., 28, 30.) 

According to this sense, the first will be saved, the last will be 
damned. But in another sense, the first who will be the last are 
those who were first called but arrive at their reward last ; while the 
last who will be the first are those who though called last become 
the first in reward. Whence the Fathers, doctors, and schoolmen 
commonly explain this parable as if Christ intended to say that the 
first as well as the last, i.e., Jews as well as Christians, who serve 

BBS 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



37 * 


8. MATTHEW, XX. 


God, will receive the same eternal life ; nor will it be to the injury 
of anyone that he has been called at the end of the world or of his 
own life ; yea, rather he will be preferred in heavenly glory before 
others who were called long before, if with greater labour and zeal 
he co-operated with the greater grace given him by God, This is 
the interpretation of S. Jerome, S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom, 
S. Thomas, Maldonatus, Gregorius de Valentia, Bellarmine (Lib. iiL 
de Justificatione , cap . 16), and Suarez. And this interpretation is very 
probable, and it is much in its favour, that it is better explained in 
this way how the same denarius is given to all the labourers. For 
the Fathers everywhere by the denarius understand eternal life. 

You will say, how is it that in this denarius the first and the last 
are equal, since the first excel the last in the felicity and glory of 
eternal life? I answer, that the same denarius denotes the same 
blessing genetically and objectively, the same Divine essence 
which constitutes the blessedness of the saints ; for this is one and 
the same, but nevertheless the fruition of it is different according to 
their different degrees of merit ; for those who have served God with 
greater grace and labour, as those did who were called last, will 
behold God in a clearer and more perfect vision, and therefore will 
have a fuller fruition of His love, and will be more blessed than 
those who served God with less grace and labour. So S. Gregory, 
S. Augustine, S. Jerome, S. Thomas (Part /., quasi. 15, art. 6), and 
others explain it To these may be added Bellarmine in the place 
already quoted, for that denarius , he says, signifies an equality of 
eternity , not of glory . Again, this opinion is favoured by the words 
of Christ (chap. xix. 21, and following), which are closely connected 
with this parable. And now to explain the several points of the 
parable according to this sense : By the day is to be understood 
the course of this world ; by the various hours the different ages of 
the world; so that the first hour is the age from Adam to Noah, 
the second that from Noah to Abraham, the third from Abraham to 
Moses, the sixth from Moses to Christ, the eleventh from Christ to 
the end of the world. Thus S. Hilary, S. Gregory, and Theophylact 
explain it. Or the day is the life of each man ; the first hour being 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



THE VINEYARD IS THE SOUL. 


373 


infancy; the third, youth ; the sixth, manhood; the ninth, old age; 
the eleventh, decrepitude. So S. Jerome and S. Basil explain it 
By the murmuring, understand with Theophylact, Suarez, and others, 
the surprise of the saints when those who shall be less in glory, and 
yet (as the Jews) had laboured more here will wonder that others, 
who laboured less here, but excelled them in the measure of graces 
sue preferred to them in glory. To conclude : the sense will be 
complete and adequate, if this second meaning is taken in conjunc- 
tion with the first ; for as I said at the end of the preceding chapter, 
the last can be taken in both ways — either as meaning the last, in 
the sense of the damned, or the last in Heaven itself, and therefore 
saved. The first sense applies to those who were first called, and 
clearly explains their murmuring; while the second sense applies to 
those last called, and in their case clearly explains the denarius, 
liow the same denarius — *>., eternal life— is given to all Wherefore, 
the second sense supplies the first, and the first supplies what is 
wanting in the second. 

Theologically . The vineyard is the soul whioh each man has to 
cultivate. Morally, therefore, we learn that we are called to labour 
in the vineyard, our own souls and the Church of God. The 
cultivators of this vineyard are not held in honour for the time 
during which they have laboured, but for the diligence, the zeal, and 
the spirit with which they have laboured. S. Jerome (Epist 13, ad 
Paul ) : Hence the Spouse in the Canticles says, They have made 
me keeper of the vineyards, mine own vineyard have I not kept 
The essence of the soul is the vineyard, planted in the soil of the 
body ; its faculties are the vines, and works of charity are its wine ; 
the vines are to be fastened to the Cross, at the foot of which we 
make a grave, against the approach of our death and burial This 
vineyard must be kept from the wild boar out of the wood (Ps. lxxx.) 

from lustful pleasure ; and from the singular wild beast ( Vulg.) 
— i.d, from the sin of pride, which makes a man singular; from the 
fox of cunning flattery ; from the wolf of greediness ; from the dog 
of detraction. We must pray the Lord to send upon this His vine- 
yard the rain of His doctrine, and the warmth of His charity, and 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



374 


8. MATTHEW, XX. 


dung — i.e., the memory of the death of His Son and of the holy 
martyrs. The soul is green like a vineyard with flowers and leaves, 
that is, with holy desires and edifying speech ; it pours forth the 
tears of compunction ; it sheds forth the sweet odour of virtue ; it 
bears the ripe grapes of good works. Again, the faithful man per- 
forms in his own soul the same works as the vine-dresser in the 
vineyard. He prunes, hoes, transplants, disentangles, &c. ; the 
faithful does the same mystically in his own soul 

And now to explain each verse briefly. Verse 2. When he had 
agreed with the labourers. Jovian and Calvin have asserted that all 
the just are equal in reward, i.e., in the denarius of eternal life, and 
that therefore they are equal in merit, and all good works are equal 
But I have already answered that all are equal generally in eternal 
life ; but in this there will be degrees, for some will have a clearei 
and others a dimmer vision of God, and therefore the one will bt 
more and the others less blessed and glorious. 

And he went out about the third hour. The Romans and the Jews 
used to divide the night as well as the day into twelve hours 
reckoned in four periods which in the night were called watches. 
The first hour began at sunrise, the sixth at midday. Again, in 
winter the hours were shorter in the day and longer in the night, 
and the reverse in summer. 

And He said unto them , go ye also. To these He does not promise 
a denarius, but what is right (just, Vulg.) By this is signified the 
merit of good works, which according to justice merits a reward, 
which God promises to each work according to distributive justice. 

Again He went out. This shews the carefulness of God who is 
desirous that all men should be workers in the vineyard of their own 
souls, and of the Church, that both may be adorned with fruits of 
every kind. 

About the eleventh hour. This is the last hour of the day, and 
those called at this hour are Christians. Origen says that Adam 
was called at the first hour, Paul at the eleventh. 

Because no man hath hired us. This is the vain excuse, S. Chrysos 
tom says, of slothful men ; for God calls all to virtue from childhood. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


THE EVENING. 


37 S 


But again S. Chrysostom says the hiring is the promise of eternal 
life : but the Gentiles knew neither God nor the promises of Goa, 
so they say that they had not been hired, or called, though they 
had been called by the law and light of nature. 

And when the evening was come \ The evening is the end of the 
world and the Day of Judgment 

Symbolically , Origen understands by the steward the holy Angels, 
as S. Michael ; but Remigius understands Christ, Who as man is the 
steward of God the Father, and in His name will judge the quick 
and dead. Irenaeus ( Lib . iv. contr. hoer. c, 70) understands the Holy 
Spirit who dispenses both gifts and graces, and glory and rewards. 

The Gentiles had more grace, and co-operated with grace more 
than the Jews who were first called, and therefore they obtain a 
higher place in Heaven. We may learn from this that a man may 
easily gain an increase of merit and glory if he practise frequent 
acts of charity, and perform all external works from charity and the 
love of God ; for thus he will merit more even than the religious 
who undergo hard penances, if he practise his works with greater 
charity than they do, although they be less difficult, 

Beginning with the last S. Gregory says, Those who are called 
at the end of life are often times rewarded before others, inasmuch 
as they depart out of the body into the kingdom before those who 
were called in childhood. 

When they came who were hired about the eleventh hour, they re- 
ceived every man a penny . This penny (denarius) was, as I have said 
above, in kind the same, but in appearance different. The meaning 
is that the Apostles and Christians called in the last age of the 
world have received a better denarius, and one that conesponds 
(congrueniem) and is due to their labour and merit 

You will say that the first called, murmured and said, iho* hast 
made them equal to us, and therefore the same denarius was given to 
both ; for if it had been a better one, they would have said, Thou 
hast made them superior to us, and they would have murmured much 
more. 

J answer, that the day's hire is given to workmen in th$ 


Digitized by Google 


376 


S. MATTHEW, XX. 


evening, and therefore those who come last could not easily perceive 
what sort of denarius was given to those who preceded them, but 
they only heard the steward say to each, receive your denarius : or if 
they did see it, they could not clearly perceive in the darkness that 
they had received a copper denarius, while the others had received a 
gold one. For copper (aurichalcum) resembles gold in glow and 
brightness, so that they thought the same denarius was given to them 
as themselves, and were offended. All this parabolically signifies the 
envy of the Jews against the Gentiles, for they were offended because 
the Gentiles were made equal to them in the grace and glory of their 
Messiah : for they thought that these things were due properly and 
entirely to them alone, but to the Gentiles only by a certain gratuitous 
dispensation. Whence arose that contention of the Jews against S. 
Peter for preaching the Gospel to Cornelius ; and that more vehe- 
ment contention against S. Paul, as is clear from the Acts of the 
Apostles. 

If you ask why Christ did not say expressly that those who came 
at the eleventh hour received a greater denarius, I answer that Christ 
was not here treating of that point, but He only intended to eradi- 
cate from the Jews their prejudice, and arrogant claim to the first 
place in the kingdom of Heaven. In opposition to this therefore 
He teaches that the first shall be last and the last first. For He 
wishes to confirm His promise made to the Apostles (S. Matt xix. 28). 
For thus the Apostles will be first in Heaven, inasmuch as they will 
be the judges of the rest, but the Jews will be the last, as they are 
to be judged by them. 

Morally , S. Chrysostom says, they are called at the eleventh hour 
who are called in old age; so that this parable was spoken to 
quicken the zeal of those who are converted in extreme old age, so 
that they may not suppose that they shall have any less than others. 

They murmured . By the murmuring, S. Chrysostom says, is 
signified the greatness of the reward and glory, which in the Apostles 
is so great that the rest of the elect and blessed from among the 
Jews would envy them and would murmur, if envy and murmuring 
were possible among the blessed. In a different way, S. Gregory 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


NATURE OF MERIT. 


377 


says, Because the Fathers before Christ were not brought to the king- 
dom ; this is to have murmured. Lastly, S. Chrysostom thinks that 
this murmuring is only an ornament of (a point introduced into) the 
parable, and therefore not to be applied to the thing signified by it 

We have borne the burden and heat of the day . That is, we have 
toiled under the burden of the Law. The Scribes and Pharisees 
used to fast twice in the week, give tithes of all things to God, teach 
the people, compass sea and land to make one proselyte ; so that 
they had a weight of labours, but often an unprofitable one. 

Verse 13. But He answered , &c. An evil eye is an envious 
eye. The sense is, Since I have bestowed a favour of grace on 
those who came at the eleventh hour by giving them a denarius, I 
have done thee no wrong. The Master might have made answer 
to the murmurer, Those who came at the eleventh hour worked 
with greater grace and zeal, and accomplished more in one hour 
than thou didst in the whole day, and therefore merited more, as 
the first have received a better denarius. But it did not become 
the Master to contend on an equality with His servant, but rather 
to silence his murmuring by asserting his own right of ownership, 
liberality, and grace. 

You will object, that S. Prosper here seems to take away all merit . 
for {lib. 2, de Vocat. Gent . c. 5) speaking of this parable, he says : 
" We read that the same reward was given to all the labourers, in 
order that those who laboured much without receiving more than the 
last might understand that they had received a gift of grace, not a 
reward of work.” Bellarmine answers : “ S. Prosper considers eternal 
life is the reward which is the same and equal in the case of all the 
blessed : and God bestows this eternal life as a gift of grace, not a 
reward of works, in that sense of which S. Augustine speaks, 4 God 
crowns His own gifts, not thy merits;’ and therefore He willed to 
bestow eternal life on those who had laboured much and on those 
who had laboured little; that those who labour much may not 
glory in their own strength.” 

lake that thine is. Take, O Pharisee, thy wealth and honours 
which I have given thee in this life and which thou didst desire more 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


378 


S. MATTHEW, XX. 


than eternal life; be content with them, and go thy way. But 
Remigius explains the words thus : “ Take thy reward, and enter 
into glory.” 

I will give unto this last (/>., the Gentiles), according to his merit, 
even as unto thee . But Origen says : “ Perhaps He says to Adam, 
Friend, I do thee no wrong, &c.” One may reasonably suppose 
that this last is the Apostle Paul, who laboured one hour. Others 
interpret: “Take thy damnation due to thee on account of thy 
murmuring, and go thy way to hell” 

So the last shall be first. According to the first sense of the 
parable, the last who will be the first in Heaven are the elect ; but 
the first who will be the last are the called only, who have not followed 
their calling or who have abandoned it, and are therefore damned. 
These are many, if they are compared with the elect, who are few 
(S. Matthew vii. 14). But according to the second sense, which I 
have given above, it is not easy to connect the latter clause^ “ Many 
are called, &c.,” with the first, “ so the last shall be first” Maldo- 
natus thus connects them : " From the particular sentence in which 
He said that the first should be last and the last first, He draws a 
more general conclusion — that not all who are called will receive a 
reward, because very many when called will not come.” Suarez con- 
siders that it is an argument a fortiori — You will riot be astonished 
that the first will be last and the last first, since many are called 
but few chosen, and therefore all the rest will be damned, which is 
more to be wondered at and dreaded ; for if many are called who 
are not saved, what wonder is it that many are called who are not 
first in reward, although they may obtain something? 

Again many, t.e., all are called to eternal life, yet He says many, 
because all are many and because He opposes them to the few who 
are elect : “ live therefore like the few,” says Cassian, “ that with 
the few you may merit election and a place in Heaven.” 

Lastly, some explain thus, many, all are called to grace and 
to the keeping of the commandments, but few are chosen to extra- 
ordinary grace, and to the keeping of the Evangelical counsels. 

Of this opinion are those schoolmen who hold that there are two 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



JESUS WENT UP. 


379 


classes of the elect i. The ordinary class consisting of those who 
upon the pre-knowledge of their merits are elected to glory; the 
other, consisting of those who are elected to glory before their 
merits are pre- known, whom they call extraordinarily predestinated 
and suppose to be here intended, when it is said, “ few are chosen.” 
Among these few are the Blessed Virgin, the Apostles, and a few 
others ; but the former are far more numerous, and therefore of them 
it is, many are called. 

The Arabic version renders How many are called \ &c., as if the 
words were an exclamation of Christ moved with wonder and pity 
at the multitude of the called and the fewness of the elect, and 
consequently at the multitude of the damned. 

Here is brought to conclusion the narration of the events of the 
third year of Christ’s ministry ; for a short time after this He raised 
Lazarus, which event took place in March, after which in the same 
month and year He was crucified. 

Verse 17. And Jesus going up, &c. This was the last journey of 
Christ to Jerusalem. From S. John xi. 54., &c., it is clear that after 
raising Lazarus He had departed to the city of Ephraim, to escape 
the hatred of the Pharisees, and now from that city on the approach 
of that Passover, when He was put to death by the Jews, He went 
up to Jerusalem according to the law. And truly He went up that 
He might accept, and, as it were, eagerly seize the cross and death 
appointed for Him in Jerusalem, and prepared by the decree of the 
Father for the redemption of the world. 

Verse 18. We go up. That is, because Jerusalem, and especially the 
temple were on Mount Sion. Again, we go up , in order to submit to the 
Cross, according to that saying, “ I, if I be lifted up from the earth, 
&c.” Again He says “ we go up” to mark this stedfast purpose, as S. 
Chrysostom paraphrases, “ Ye see how I go of My free will to death ; 
when then ye shall see Me hung upon the Cross, think not that I 
am no more than man : for though to be able to die is human, yet 
to be willing to die is more than human.” 

Lastly, we go up , as if to our triumph on the citadel of Jerusalem 
and Calvary ; for on the cross Christ triumphed over death, sin, the 
devil and hell ; as the Apostle teaches, Coloss, ii., 15. 


Digitized by Google 


380 


8. MATTHEW, XX. 


The Son of Man is betrayed, &c. “ For,” says Rabanus, “ Judas 
betrayed the Lord to the Jews, and they delivered Him to the Gen- 
tiles, *>., to Pilate and the Romans To this end the Lord refused 
prosperity in this world, but chose rather to suffer affliction, that He 
might shew us who have fallen by delights through what bitterness 
we must needs return ; whence it follows to mock , and to scourge, and to 
crucify .” “ The whole salvation of men,” says S. Chrysostom, “rests 
on the death of Christ ; wherefore there is nothing for which we are 
more bound to render thanks to God than for His death. He 
imparted the mystery of His death to His Apostles in secret, because 
the more precious treasure is ever committed to the more worthy 
vessels.” And again, “ when sorrow comes at a time we are looking 
for it, it is found lighter than it would have been had it come upon 
us suddenly.” 

To mock, and to scourge, and to crucify . These were the three prin- 
cipal parts of the passion of Christ 

And the third day He shall rise again. This is the honey of the 
resurrection in which is hidden the gall of the passion. Whence S. 
Augustine (He Civ . /. 18) says “ In His passion He shews us how we 
ought to suffer for the truth ; in His resurrection we ought to hope 
in the Trinity, whence He says * and on the third day He shall rise 
again/ ” And S. Chrysostom " This was said, that when they should 
see the sufferings, they should look for the resurrection.” And & 
Augustine adds the reason “For one death, that namely of the 
Saviour according to the body, was to us a salvation from two deaths* 
both of soul and body ; and this one resurrection gained for us two 
resurrections.” 

Morally, Christ often repeats the mention of His passion, that He 
might commend His love to them, and they might love Him in 
return, and repay love for love, blood for blood, death for death. 
For the Cross of Christ is the furnace and fire of love. Wherefore 
S. Bernard (He Quad. Heb.) says “Thou owest to Jesus Christ thy 
whole life, because He laid down His life for thine, and endured 
bitter torments that thou mightest not endure eternal torments;” and 
in conclusion he says, “ When therefore I have given Him all that J 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



WHAT WE OWE TO GOD. 


3»I 


am, and all that I can, is it not like only a drop compared to a river, 
or a grain of sand to a heap?” And again he says ( Tract . de dilig. Deo) 
“ If I owe my whole self in return for my creation, what can I add 
now for my re-creation, and for my re-creation in such a manner ? For 
it was more easy to create me than to re-create me. For He who 
created me at once and with a word only, in re-creating me spoke 
many words, and performed wonderful acts, and endured afflictions, 
and not only afflictions, but indignities : in His first work He gave 
me to myself, in His second He gave Himself to me ; and when He 
gave Himself He restored me to myself. For my creation and for 
my re-creation I owe myself for myself, and that doubly. What shall 
I give to God for Himself? for even if I could repay myself 9 thou- 
sand times over, what am I compared with God ? ” 

For the sake of Christ therefore we should not refuse to endure 
reproaches, crosses and flames ; for to Him belongs our life and all 
that we are, for He Himself bought and redeemed us not with gold, 
but with the Divine price of His own blood. S. Leo (Serm. 8, de 
lass.) says, “ Thy cross, O Christ, is the fountain of all blessings, by 
which is given to them that believe strength out of weakness, glory 
out of reproach, life out of death.” 

Then came to Him the mother , &c. Then, when they had heard 
from Christ that His death was at hand, and after death His Resur- 
rection, after which they expected the glorious kingdom of Christ ; 
wherefore they lose no time in making a request that they may 
themselves obtain the chief place in it above the other Apostles. 

The mother of Zebededs children . By name Salome. See S. Mark 
xv. 40., S. Matthew xxvii. 56. S. Mark says that the petition came 
not from the mother but from the sons. The petition of the mother 
proceeded from the petition of the sons, so that the sons spoke by 
the mouth of their mother. 

A certain thing ; saying, as S. Mark has it, we would that Thou 
shouldst do for us whatsoever we shall desire , for they feared that if 
they expressed their desire for the first place Christ would at once 
refuse it They wish therefore to bind Christ by a general petition, 
which if He granted He would be unable to refuse the particular 
petition. This is he manner of women. In the same way Bath* 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 





8. MA1THEW, XX. 


sheba introduced her petition to Solomon to give Abishag to 
Adonijah in marriage, i Kings ii. 21, Solomon consented; but after- 
wards when she made her request known he refused, saying, Ask for 
him the kingdom. 

Verse 21. And He said unto her, &c Christ wisely refuses the 
general petition, and would have her express it particularly, lest she 
should be asking for something foolish and unworthy, which He 
foresaw she would do, in order that He might teach us to do like 
He did. 

She said to Him , &c. S. Chrysostom says, “ They wished, since 
they had heard that the disciples should sit upon twelve thrones, to 
obtain the primacy of that seat, and they knew that they would be 
preferred before the rest with the exception of Peter ; but fearing 
that Peter was preferred before them, they dared to say, ‘Grant that 
one of us may sit on Thy right hand and the other on Thy left*” 
We may learn from this how bold and blind and insatiable ambition 
is to which she incited these two Apostles, because they had seen that 
in the Transfiguration which was the beginning of Christ’s kingdom 
they were preferred by Christ to the other Apostles. 

But the mother is to be excused because she makes her request 
of Christ, her kinsman according to the flesh, for her sons whom 
she loved, even more than herself. So S. Jerome says, “The mother 
asks this from womanly error, and affectionate piety, not knowing 
what she was asking." 

In the same way or manner S. Chrysostom excuses her sons. “ Let 
not any one,” he says, “ be disturbed at our saying that the Apostles 
were so imperfect, for the mystery of the Cross had not yet been 
consummated ; the grace of the Spirit had not yet been infused into 
their hearts. Wherefore if you wish to learn what their virtues were, 
consider what they were after the Spirit had been given, and you will 
see that all restlessness of mind was removed from them. For this 
reason only their imperfection is made known that you may perceive 
clearly what they were suddenly made by grace.” 

Ye know not what ye ask. Because ye know not, in the first place, 
of what sort My kingdom is— namely, a spiritual and heavenly one, 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



BISHOPS AND PRINCES, STEWARDS. 383 

not a carnal and an earthly one. Secondly, because ye are asking 
for the triumph before the victory ; 44 for the kingdom of Heaven 
suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force.” Thirdly, because 
you suppose that this kingdom is given by right of blood to those 
who seek it, whereas it is given only to those who deserve and strive. 
Let bishops and princes, then, follow this example of Christ, and 
make answer to their friends, their sons, and to importunate women, 
when they ask them for prebends, dignities, and appointments for 
which they are unfitted, 44 Ye know not what ye ask.” My prebends 
and appointments are not mine to give as I please, and because I 
so choose, to my relations and servants ; I am a steward, not an 
owner; God will require an exact account of my stewardship. For 
great is the injury to Christ and His Church, and it is the cause of 
many evils, if appointments and benefices are given on account of 
relationship and friendship, to unworthy persons. 

Ye know not what ye ask. First, because ye think that My king- 
dom is an earthly one, and one of outward show, like that of David 
and Solomon ; whereas it is spiritual and heavenly. So S. Chrysos- 
tom says : 44 He says this to show that they were seeking nothing 
spiritual.” Secondly, because they were asking for what had already 
been promised — namely, to sit with Christ, and with Him to judge 
the twelve tribes of Israel. So S. Hilary : 44 They know not what 
they ask, because there was no doubt about the glory of the Apostles, 
for His former discourse had made it clear to them that they should 
judge the world.” But among these thrones they seemed to have 
asked for the first, and the next to Christ, though they had not yet 
been specially promised by Christ to them. Thirdly, because they 
were asking for what exceeded the measure of their gifts and merits. 
Bede says : 44 They know not what they ask when they ask for a 
throne of glory which they had not yet merited.” For the first 
thrones in Heaven belong to those who are of greater — yea, of the 
greatest — merit Fourthly, because they were asking at an unsuit- 
able time, when the Passion of Christ was at hand. As S. Chrysos- 
tom says : 44 Ye speak of honour, but I speak of labours and toil ; 
for this is no time for rewards, but rather for slaughter, battles, and 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


3«4 


S. MATTHEW, XX. 


perils.” Fifthly, because they were asking for what was contrary to 
their vocation ; for they were called to follow Christ in His poverty 
and cross, not to strive after honours. Sixthly, because they ought 
to have sought for the labours of the cross, by which they might 
merit honours. Seventhly, because they asked to sit on the left 
hand as well as on the right For those condemned in the judgment 
will stand on Christ's left hand ; which is, says S. Chrysostom, as it 
were to say, “ I have called you to My right hand, and you wilfully 
are hastening from My right hand to My left” But this is a mystical 
meaning ; the most suitable meanings are the first, the third, and the 
sixth. 

Art ye able , &c. Through the Cross and Passion the way hes for 
Me to My kingdom, therefore the same way might be trodden by 
you if you desire it S. Bernard says, that “ Christ like a good and 
wise physician first drank the draught Himself which He was pre- 
paring for His own, He underwent His Passion and Death, and 
so He became immortal and impassible ; thus teaching His own 
how they might confidently drink the draught which produces 
soundness and life.” S. Chrysostom and Theophylact say that 
Christ called His Passion a cup, because He so willingly endured, 
and, as it were, drained it, as a thirsty man would a cup of wine. 
In Scripture, and among profane writers, the cup signifies the lot, 
whether good or evil, which God appoints, and as it were adminis- 
ters to each man. 

S. Cyprian, understanding martyrdom by the cup, says, “A fiercer 
conflict is now at hand (for God had revealed to him that the 
Valerian persecution was coming), for which the soldiers of Christ 
ought to prepare themselves with firm courage, considering that for 
that very reason they daily drink the cup of the blood of Christ, so 
that they may also themselves be able to shed their blood for the 
sake of Christ.” For at that time they used to communicate daily, 
and that under both kinds, bread and wine. S. Chrysostom remarks 
how “Christ encourages and draws them on by the way in which 
He puts the question. For He did not say, can ye shed your 
blood, but can ye drink the cup t Then, drawing them on, He says, 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



DRINKING THE CUP. 385 

which I shall drink of, so that by sharing with Him in His labours 
they may be rendered more ready to undergo the same.” 

Christ also calls His Passion a baptism, because in it He was 
wholly immersed and plunged, i.e., He died. 

They say , We are able . John and James seem to have understood 
the meaning of the cup ; and yet as they had shown their ambition 
in asking for the primacy, so they rashly answer, that they can 
drink the cup, whereas, in truth, they could not yet do so ; but after- 
wards they were able, through the grace of Christ given by the Holy 
Ghost on the Day of Pentecost. 

Verse 23. And He saith to them, &c. Christ here foretells the 
martyrdom of James and John. For S. James, preaching Christ 
more fervently than the other Apostles, first suffered martyrdom for 
Him, being slain by Herod with the sword. S. John also drank of 
this cup when he was plunged by Domitian, at Rome, before the 
Latin Gate, into a cauldron of boiling oil, and came forth renewed 
in strength ; so that by a new miracle he was a martyr by living 
rather by dying. 

Again, not only Prochorus, S. John’s disciple, in his Life of S. John 
(the truth of which is rightly suspected by Baronius), but also S. 
Isidore declares that S. John really drank the cup of poison, but that 
he also drank it without harm ; whence also he is generally repre- 
sented in pictures holding a cup. And, lastly, we may say that the 
whole life of S. John was a continual martyrdom, for he lived a very 
long time after all the Apostles, to the year of our Lord 101 ; and 
this long absence from Christ, his beloved — after Whom he was 
continually longing— was a lengthened martyrdom to him, as it was 
also to the Blessed Virgin, to whom he had been given as a son by 
Christ on the Cross. 

Again, S. John underwent a special martyrdom while he stood with 
the Blessed Virgin by the Cross on Mount Calvary, and beheld Christ 
— his Life, Whom he loved more than his own life —suffering the 
bitter pains of the Cross for three hours. 

But to sit on my right hand, &c. The Arians thought that it is 
here said that it was not in the power of Christ to give this, but of 
VOL. IL C C 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


386 


S. MATTHEW, XX. 


the Father, and consequently, that Christ was not equal (Greek, 
bfioovaioc) to the Father 3 but they are in error. For Christ is here 
putting an antithesis, not between Himself and the Father, but 
between James and John (who were ambitiously seeking the first 
place in His kingdom) and those to whom it of right belonged. 
The point of the argument lies in the word you, which is read in 
the Vulgate, though not in the Greek and other versions. Whence 
Remigius says : “ It is not Mine to give to you — to proud men, 
such as you are, but to the humble.” Again : It is not Mine to give 
to you as My kinsmen according to the flesh 3 for it is given not to 
the person, but to the life (as S. Jerome says), not from favour, but 
according to merit 

Mark, that Christ does not grant what these two ask for, that the 
rest of the Apostles may not be provoked through being excluded; 
nor does He refuse it, so as to make these two sad. So S. Jerome : 
“ He said not, 1 Ye shall not sit there/ that He might not discourage 
the two brethren 3 neither did He say, * Ye shall sit there/ that He 
might not stir the others to anger 3” but by holding up the prize 
before all, He might encourage all to strive for Him. So a just king, 
presiding over a contest instituted by him, if his kinsmen and friends 
should come to him and say, “Give us the prize,” justly makes 
answer — “ It is not mine to give the prize to you, but to those for 
whom it is prepared and decreed, namely, to those who strive in the 
contest and gain the mastery.” 

Again it is clear from S. Luke xxiL 29, 30, that this kingdom is 
Christ's to bestow. I appoint unto you a kingdom as My Father hath 
appointed unto Me, that ye may eat and drink at My table in My king- 
dom, and sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel. Christ, 
however, says here that it belongs rather to the Father, both because 
as man He was always subject to the Father, and also that by giving 
them a proper reason He might send them away from Himself and 
refer them to the Father, so that they might humble themselves 
before Him 3 and be prevented by shame from asking for it 3 and 
also lastly because as wisdom and works of wisdom are proper to the 
Son and works of goodness to the Holy Spirit, so works of power 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



WHO HAVE THE HIGHEST PLACE. 387 

and providence, to which it belongs to predestinate men to the king- 
dom, are proper to the Father. 

But to these for whom it is prepared of My Father The interpre- 
tation of Euthymius is narrow, who explains those as being Peter and 
PauL Narrower still is the interpretation of Hilary who says that 
Moses and Elias are meant ; for he thinks that the Transfiguration is 
alluded to in which Moses and Elias saw the glory of Christ in His 
kingdom and shared in it Narrowest of all is the interpretation of 
S. Chrysostom, who says that the place on the right hand and on the 
left will be given to none ; because no one, he says, can be exalted 
to the right hand of Christ, since He alone sits at the right hand of 
the Father. But these interpretations are too narrow, for Christ 
speaks generally of all the elect Wherefore the highest places in 
the kingdom of Heaven are prepared by God for those who after 
striving most earnestly gain the victory. Wherefore by the right and 
left hand are to be understood pre-eminence in the kingdom, which 
will be granted to those who are first in humility, charity, patience, 
and zeal in preaching the Gospel. The Abbot Athanasius, we read, 
was caught up into Heaven and heard the choirs of the blessed 
singing the praises of God, and when he would join their company 
he heard a voice which said to him “ no one enters here who has 
lived carelessly, go thy way, strive diligently, and despise the vanities 
of the world.” It is also related of the holy Furseus (Bede, Hist 
Ang. lib . 3, cap . 19) that he was caught up to Heaven and heard the 
angels and saints singing. “ They shall go from strength to strength: 
unto the God of gods shall they appear in Sion.” Let us advance 
therefore from strength to strength, and we shall ascend from glory 
to glory, from angels to Cherubim and Seraphim, from the lowest to 
the highest throne in Heaven. 

And when the ten heard it, &c. You will ask how it was that 
the other Apostles heard the request of the two brethren. The 
most probable opinion is that of Francis Lucas, who says that Salome 
and her sons spoke privately with Christ, but that He answered so 
that the rest should hear what He said and understand from His 
answer what the two had asked for. For He knew that they were 

C C 2 


Digitized by Google 


3«3 


S. MATTHEW, XX. 


all suffering from the same disease of ambition, and He wished to 
heal them all Also since they were infected with the same desire, 
they detected the desire of the others : for every one measures 
others by himself, and imagines that they have the same desires and 
ambition as himself. 

The ten were not so much displeased at the ambition of James 
and John as troubled with the fear that they would be placed after 
them ; for they too desired the first place ; so dogs, though at other 
times friendly, are angry and snarl at each other when they are gnaw- 
ing the same bone. 

Ambition indeed begets envy, and envy begets anger in him who 
desires the same honour lest it be taken from him by another. SL 
Basil, in his homily against envy, mentions an effectual remedy 
against this vice, “ not to set a high value on anything belonging to 
this world, such as wealth or glory ; for he who has succeeded in 
subjecting all worldly things to his reason, and has devoted himself 
to the pursuit of the true beauty and honour, will be very far from 
esteeming any one happy, or to be envied on account of any worldly 
advantages ; and he who is of such a spirit as never to admire any- 
thing belonging to this life will never be under the dominion of 
envy ." 

Ye know that the princes of the Gentiles , &c. Christ here does 
not find fault with the civil or ecclesiastical power which is exercised 
by princes and bishops, as the Anabaptists maintain; for this is 
needful in every commonwealth for good government A tyrant does 
not care for the interests of those under him, but consults only his 
own advantage and honour. Whereas true princes seek the good 
of their subjects, and are the servants rather than the lords of the 
commonwealth, as Aristotle says. 

And they that are great, &c. That is, they rule imperiously, and 
exercise an irresponsible power over those subject to them. 

It shall not be so among you, &c. The Vulgate reads in verse 27, 
will be your servant, and with it agree the Syriac, Egyptian, and 
iEthiopic versions. In these words Christ teaches not so much the 
way and means by which a man may obtain the primacy in the 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



DUTY OF A PRIMATE. 


389 


Church as how one who is a primate ought to behave himself in the 
Church, namely as the least of all ; and by setting before them this 
rule of humility He deters the Apostles from ambitiously seeking the 
chief place. It is plain that this is the meaning because this verse 
is in antithesis with the preceding : for He contrasts His own gentle, 
benignant and wholesome rule with the imperious and tyrannical 
authority that is exercised over the Gentiles. S. Gregory {Pastor, 
part 2, c. 6 ), teaches how a prelate ought to unite authority with 
gentleness, and act with authority against the refractory and with 
gentleness towards the obedient, “ Let a ruler,” he says, “be a com- 
panion in humility to those who do well, but let him be firmly 
opposed with a righteous zeal against the faults of delinquents.” 

At the same time Christ shows in these words by what way we 
ought to advance towards the highest place in Heaven, namely, by 
the way of humility. And for this reason the Pope prefers this 
title, Servant of the servants of Christ. This is what S. Peter, the 
Vicar of Christ, taught the pastors of the Church, “ Feed the flock of 
God, which is among you, &c. (1 Epist. v. 2.) 

Likewise on account of this saying of Christ S. Francis wished the 
prelates of his Order to be called ministers and brothers minor 
(minorite friars), both that he might employ the very words of the 
Gospel, which he had promised to observe, and that his disciples 
might learn by their veiy name that they had come to the school ot 
Christ to learn humility. For Christ, the Teacher of humility, that 
He might give His disciples a perfect rule of humility said, “ Whoso- 
ever will be chief among you let him be your minister, &c.” 

Even as the Son of Man, &c. S. Francis Xavier furnished a rare 
example of this humility of Christ, and recalled it to this age when 
it had, as it were, gone out of fashion. For when he was appointed 
by the Pope Apostolic Legate of India, he would have no servant^ 
although the Viceroy of the King of Portugal offered him several, 
and urged him to accept them ; but he ministered to all, both in 
bodily and spiritual services. He used himself to hear the con- 
fessions of the sick, and comfort the sorrowful ; he used to administer 
medicines to the sick, and cleanse their bodies and wash their 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


390 


S. MATTHEW, XX. 


bandages, and catechise the ignorant and children ; and besides he 
used to attend to and feed the horses of his companions : and when 
some one said that these things were unworthy of an Apostolic 
Legate, he answered that there was nothing more worthy than 
Christian chanty and humility which became all things to all men 
that it may gain all : which Christ through His whole life continually 
enjoined by word and deed So that by this conduct he did not 
lose, but increased his authority. Moreover Christ himself while on 
earth had not even one servant, but made himself the servant of alL 
S. Chrysostom {Horn, 40, the Epis . to the Cars.) says, “ Listen to 
Paul ; these hands , he says, have ministered to my necessities and to them 
that were with me That teacher of the world, and man worthy of 
heaven, scrupled not to serve innumerable mortals \ while you think 
it a disgrace unless you have your herds of servants in your train : 
not seeing that this is a great disgrace to you. God gave us hands 
and feet that we might do without servants. What is the use of 
crowds of servants?” 

A ransom for many . Not as if Christ died only for the predesti- 
nated, as the heretics formerly called Predestinarians, and Calvin, in 
recent times, maintained : for that Christ suffered and died for all 
men & Paul clearly teaches (2 Cor. v. 14. and 1 S. John Epist. 
il 2). The words for many are put for all \ Euthymius says, 
because these all were not few but many. So many is taken for all 
in this chapter v. 16, and chapter xxvi. 28, and Romans v. 19, and 
elsewhere. Or for many ; because although Christ died for all, and 
obtained for all and bestowed upon all means sufficient for salvation, 
yet the fruit of His death, and salvation in its completeness falls to 
the share of the just only and those who persevere until death in 
righteousness. So S. Jerome, Maldonatus and others. 

And as they departed from Jericho . Christ was going from the city 
of Ephrem, through Jericho which which lay between, to Jerusalem 
—to the death of the Cross. 

Jericho w.is distant from Jerusalem one hundred and fifty stadia, 
and from Ephrem on the Jordan sixty stadia, according to Josephus. 
The journey to Jericho is easy and along a plain, but from Jericho to 
Jerusalem it is mountainous, steep and difficult 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



THE TWO BLIND MEN. 


39 * 


Jericho in Hebrew is derived from rrn, the moon, because it is of 
the form of the moon, or from rm, odour or scent, because the 
balsam, a plant of very sweet odour, grows there. 

Symbolically . Rabanus says that Jericho, which is interpreted 

“ the moon," denotes the infirmity of our changefulness and mortality, 
and therefore these blind men were found there. Again S. Gregory 
(Horn. 12, in Evangel ) says, “ Jericho is interpreted * the moon/ and 
the moon in Scripture is put for the infirmity of the flesh. While 
therefore our Creator is drawing nigh to Jericho, the blind man is 
returning to the light; because while Divinity takes upon itself the 
infirmity of our flesh, the human race regained the light which it had 
lost” 

Mystically . Origen says, By Jericho is understood the world 
into which Christ descended. Those who are in Jericho know not 
how to escape from the wisdom of the world, unless they see not 
Jesus only coming out of Jericho, but His disciples. This when 
they saw, great multitudes despised the world and all worldly things, 
that under the guidance of Christ they might go up to the Heavenly 
Jerusalem.” 

Behold two blind men, &c. Tftis is the same history that S. Mark 
relates (chap. x. 46) ; he mentions only one blind man, Bartimseus. 
S. Augustine (lib. 2 de cons. Evang. ch. 65) says that there were two 
blind men, one of whom was very well known in that city; “for 
Bartimaeus, the son of Timaeus,” he says, “had sunk from great 
wealth, and was now sitting, not only as blind, but as a beggar. For 
this reason then Mark chose to mention him alone, because the 
restoration of his sight procured fame to this miracle in proportion to 
the notoriety of the fact of his blindness.” 

Moreover, S. Augustine, Jansen, and others, are of opinion that 
this blind man was not the same as the one of whom S. Luke speaks, 
ch. xviii. 35, because S. Luke says that he was healed as they drew 
near to Jericho, while this one was healed as they came out But 
since S. Luke's narrative agrees in all points with that of S. Matthew 
and S. Mark, we must suppose that it was one and the same blind 
man whose prayer to Christ for the restoration of his sight was not 

% 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


39 * 


& MATTHEW, XX. 


heard on account of the crowd, and Christ made as though He 
heard him not, that he might quicken his faith and hope, and th en 
on the following day he repeated his prayer as Christ went out and 
obtained it So S. Ambrose, Maldonatus, and others explain it 

Allegorically . Origen and S. Ambrose say that the two blind men 
were Judah and Israel, who before the coming of Christ were blind 
because they saw not the true Word which was contained in the law 
and the prophets. But Rabanus, with S. Augustine, says that they 
were the Jews and the Gentiles, for they were both ignorant of the 
way of salvation. But S. Chrysostom understands them of the 
Gentiles only, who are descended partly from Ham and partly from 
Japhet 

TVopologicaUy , by the two blind men we may understand the two- 
fold blindness of the affections and of the understanding. 

Have mercy on us, &c. That is, “0 Messiah, of whom the 
prophets foretold that He should be bom of David : it is a mark 
of the Messiah to have mercy on the miserable, and to give sight to 
the blind (Isaiah xxxv. 5). We believe that Thou art the Messiah ; 
therefore give us sight that all may know that Thou art the Messiah, 
and may believe and worship Thee.” 

The multitude rebuked, &c. That they being mean men should 
not disturb Christ, who perhaps was teaching ; or delay Him on this 
journey. So Euthymius. 

Mystically: S. Gregory (Horn. 2 , in Evang.) understands by the 
multitude the crowds of carnal desires, which before Jesus comes to 
our heart, by their temptations dissipate our meditation, and drown 
the voice of the heart in prayer. 

But they cried the more, &c. Because there was need of a louder 
cry that they might be heard by Christ above the noise of the 
crowd. 

Morally . S. Augustine (de Verb . Dom. Ser. 18), explains it thus, 
" Every Christian who has begun to live well, and to despise the 
world, at the commencement of his new life has to endure the 
censures of cold Christians, but if he perseveres, those who at first 
hindered him will soon comply.” The fear of man then must be 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


HEALING THE EYES OF THE HEART. 393 

overcome by one who wishes to serve God. The first virtue of a 
Christian, as S. Jerome says, is to despise and to be despised. 

S. Hilary says, “ Faith, when it is called, is the more inflamed, 
and so in the midst of dangers it is secure, and in the midst of 
security, it is endangered.” 

And Jesus stood still , &c. S. Jerome says, “Jesus stood still 
because they being blind could not see their way : about Jericho 
there were many pits, crags, and steep places, therefore the Lord 
stands still that they might come to Him.” 

S. Gregory (Horn. 2, in Evang.) interprets symbolically , “to pass 
by is the property of the human nature, to stand still of the Divine. 
The Lord as He passed by heard the cry of the blind man, but when 
He restored his sight He stood stilL 

Analogically, S. Augustine (Lib. 1. quoest. Evang. c. 8 ), “ Faith in 
His temporal Incarnation prepares us for the understanding of 
things eternal ; for things temporal pass by, but things eternal stand 
still.” 

And called them. S. Jerome says : “ He commands that they be 
called, that the multitude may not hinder them ; and He asks what 
they would, that by their answer their necessity may be made clear, 
and His power be known in their healing.” 

What will yet He was not ignorant of their desire, but though 
He knew it, He wills to hear their confession of it. 

They say unto Him, & c. Nothing is naturally so much desired by 
man as to see ; so that to see seems like life, and not to see like 
death and continual sorrow. 

S. Augustine, writing on these words, says : “ The whole object of 
life is the healing of the eyes of the heart so that we may behold. 
To this end the sacred mysteries are celebrated, the Word of God 
is preached, the moral exhortations of the Church are made — that is, 
those which pertain to the correction of morals, and to the renun- 
ciation of this world ; not in word only, but by a change of life. To 
this end the Divine Scriptures direct their aim, that our inward eye 
may be purged from that thing whatever it is which hinders us from 
beholding God.” 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



394 


S. MATTHEW, XX* 


Let the man, then, who is blinded by sin and concupiscence say. 
Grant me, O Lord, to see the baseness of sin, the vileness of con- 
cupiscence, the worthlessness of pleasure, the fierceness of hell-fire ; 
the beauty of virtue, the blessedness of Paradise, the eternity of 
glory ; so that I may despise all concupiscence, and aim at the prac- 
tice of virtue. 

So Jesus had compassion on them . S. Jerome says : “Jesus con- 
sidering their ready will, rewards it by fully granting their desire. 
Whence He says in another place, Whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, \ 
believing^ ye shall receive" 

And they followed Him . “ These blind men,” S. Chrysostom says, 
“ as before this bounty they were persevering, so after receiving it 
they were not ungrateful;” for, when healed, they offered a good 
service to Christ in following Him. For this is what God requires 
of thee— “ to walk circumspectly (Vulg., sollicitum) with thy God.” 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



3V5 


CHAPTER XXI. 

I Christ rideth into Jerusalem upon an ass . 12 Driveth the buyers and sellers out 

of the temple. 17 Curseth the fig tree. 23 Putteth to silence the priests and 
ilders t 28 And rebuketh them by the similitude oj the two sons , 33 And the 
husbandmen , who slew such as wort sent unto them . 

A ND when they drew nigh unto Jerusalem, and were come to Bethphage, unto 
the mount of Olives, then sent Jesus two disciples, 

2 Saying unto them, Go into the village over against you, and straightway 
ye shall find an ass tied, and a colt with her : loose them , and bring them unto 
me. 

3 And if any man say ought unto you, ye shall say, The Lord hath need of 
them ; and straightway he will send them. 

4 All this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, 
saying, 

5 Tell ye the daughter of Sion, Behold thy King cometh unto thee, meek, and 
sitting upon an ass, and a colt the foal of an ass. 

6 And the disciples went, and did as Jesus commanded them. 

7 And brought the ass, and the colt, and put on them their clothes, and they set 
him thereon. 

8 And a very great multitude spread their garments in the way ; others cut 
down branches from the trees, and strawed them in the way. 

9 And the multitudes that went before, and that followed, cried, saying, 
Hosanna to the son of David : Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord ; 
Hosanna in the highest 

10 And when he came into Jerusalem, all the city was moved, saying, Who is 
this? 

II And the multitude said, This is Jesus the prophet of Nazareth of Galilee. 

12 11 And Jesus went into the temple of God, and cast out all them that sold and 
bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the moneychangers, and the 
seats of them that sold doves. 

13 And said unto them, It is written. My house shall be called the house 01 
prayer ; but ye have made it a den of thieves. 

14 And the blind and the lame came to him in the temple ; and he healed 
them. 


Digitized by Google 



39 « 


$. MATTURW, XXI. 


15 And when the chief priests and scribes saw the wonderful things that he did, 
and the children crying in the temple, and saying, Hosanna to the son of Da-rid : 
they were sore displeased. 

16 And said unto him, Hearest thou what these say? And Jesus saith unto 
them, Yea ; have ye never read, Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou 
hast perfected praise ? 

17 If And he left them, and went out of the city into Bethany ; and he lodged 
there. 

18 Now in the morning as he returned into the city, he hungered. 

19 And when he saw a fig tree in the way, he came to it, and found nothing 
thereon, but leaves only, and said unto it, Let no fruit grow on thee henceforward 
for ever. And presently the fig tree withered away. 

20 And when the disciples saw it, they marvelled, saying, How soon is the fig 
tree withered away ! 

21 Jesus answered and said unto them, Verily I say unto you, If ye have faith, 
and doubt not, ye shall not only do this which is dons to the fig tree, but also if ye 
shall say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea ; it 
shall be done. 

22 And all things, whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall 
receive. 

23 II And when he was come into the temple, the chief priests and the elders o* 
the people came unto him as he was teaching, and said, By what authority doest 
thou these things ? and who gave thee this authority ? 

24 And Jesus answered and said unto them, I also will ask you one thing, 
which if ye tell me, I in like wise will tell you by what authority I do these 
things. 

25 The baptism of John, whence was it ? from heaven, or of men ? And they 
reasoned with themselves, saying, If we shall say. From heaven ; he will say unto 
us, Why did ye not then believe him ? 

26 But if we shall say, Of men ; we fear the people ; for all hold John as a 
prophet 

27 And they answered Jesus, and said. We cannot telL And he said unto them. 
Neither tell I you by what authority I do these things. 

28 If But what think ye ? A certain man had two sons ; and he came to the 
first, and said, Son, go work to day in my vineyard. 

29 He answered and said, I will not : but afterwards he repented and went 

30 And he came to the second, and said likewise. And he answered and said 
I go, sir : and went not 

31 Whether of them twain did the will of his father ? They say unto him, The 
first Jesus saith unto them, Verily I say unto you, That the publicans and the 
harlots go into the kingdom of God before you. 

32 For John came unto you in the way of righteousness, and ye believed him 
not : but the publicans and the harlots believed him : and ye, when ye had seen 
it, repented not afterward, that ye might believe him. 

33 If Hear another parable : There was a certain housholder, which planted a 
vineyard, and hedged it round about, and digged a wine-press in it, and built a 
tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into a far country : 

34 And when the time of the fruit drew near, he sent his servants to the hus- 
bandmen, that they might receive the fruits of it 


Digitized by Google 



397 

35 And the husbandmen took his servants, and beat one, and killed another, and 
stoned another. 

36 Again, he sent other servants more than the first ; and they did onto them 
likewise. 

37 But last of all he sent unto them his son, saying, They will reverence my 
son. 

38 Bnt when the husbandmen saw the son, they said among themselves, This 
Is the heir ; come, let us kill him, and let us seize on his inheritance. 

39 And they caught him, and cast him out of the vineyard, and slew him, 

40 When the lord therefore of the vineyard cometh, what will he do unto those 
husbandmen? 

41 They say unto him, He will miserably destroy those wicked men, and 
will let out his vineyard unto other husbandmen, which shall render him the 
fruits in their seasons. 

42 Jesus saith unto them, Did ye never read in the scriptures, The stone 
which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the comer : this 
is the Lord’s doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes ? 

43 Therefore say I unto you, The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, 
and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. 

44 And whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken ; but on whomsoever 
it shall fall, it will grind him to powder. 

45 And when the chief priests and Pharisees had heard his parables, they per- 
ceived that he spake of them. 

46 But when they sought to lay hands on him, they feared the multitude, because 
they took him for a prophet. 

And when they were come nigh , &c. Mark has (xi 1), “And 
when they came nigh to Jerusalem, unto Bethphage and Bethany, 
at the mount of Olives, He sendeth forth two of His disciples,” and 
Luke adds (xix. 29), “And it came to pass, when he was come nigh 
to Bethphage and Bethany, at the mount called the mount of Olives, 
He sent two of His disciples.” But Mark and Luke are speaking 
generally, because Bethphage, Jerusalem, and Bethany are all nigh 
to each other. For coming to particulars it is clear from S. John 
(xii. 1, 12) that on the preceding Sabbath Christ supped, and 
passed the night at Bethany, and on the following day, or Palm 
Sunday, He came nearer to Jerusalem, that is to say, to Bethphage, 
and from thence sent His disciples to fetch the ass with her colt 
For Bethphage was nearer to Jerusalem. Whence from Bethany 
through Bethphage, the Mount of Olives and the valley of Jehosha- 
phat was the road to Jerusalem. The valley of Jehoshaphat is close 
to Jerusalem. The brook Kedron flows through it After th% 


Digitized by Google 


39 » 


& MATTHEW, XXI. 


valley you come to the mount of Olives, then to the village of Beth- 
phage, and then to Bethany. 

Bethphage , in Hebrew, means the house of the mouthy or, at the 
mouth of the valley . Beth is a house, phe , the mouth , ge, a valley. 
For this village of Bethphage was seated at the foot of Mount 
Olivet, in a sort of cleft, or as it were mouth of the hill. Again this 
village was situated, as we may say, at the mouth, or entrance of the 
valley of Jehoshaphat And this entrance is extremely narrow, as 
you come from Bethphage into the valley, and so on through the 
golden gate to the Temple. Whence it is very probable, as Jansen 
and Adrichomius say, that Bethphage was a village of the priests, in 
which lambs, goats, and oxen were kept ready for the temple sacri- 
fices. Thus from Bethphage the priests were wont to fetch the 
paschal lambs, and other victims to the temple. From this cause 
too, when Christ willed to be brought in triumph from Bethphage 
through the golden gate unto Jerusalem He would show that He 
was the Lamb which taketh away the sins of the world, prefigured 
by the paschal lambs. 

Again, He wished in His triumphal entry to pass through the 
valley of Jehoshaphat, in order to intimate, that in that same valley 
He will, in the day of Judgment, pass His tremendous judgment 
upon all men. Now therefore He ndes through the valley in 
triumph to Jerusalem, as her Lord and King, and, thus, as it were, 
takes possession of His kingdom, which He will bring to a glorious 
consummation in the Day of Judgment. It is as if He said, “ Ac- 
knowledge Me, O ye Jews, to be your Messiah, believe and obey 
Me, that in the day of Judgment, which I will accomplish in this 
valley, I may award you Heaven. But if ye persist in your unbelief 
I shall adjudge you to hell. Wherefore also, I come from Bethany, 
where a few days since I raised up Lazarus from the dead, which 
ye have all seen and wondered at, that by it, and My other miracles 
ye may know that I am your Messiah, the Saviour of the world.” 

Then Jesus sent , &c. S. Hilary, Bede, and the Gloss think that 
these two were Peter and Philip ; but Origen and Theophylact think 
they were Peter and Paul — that is, typically, in such sort that the 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



TROPOLOGICAL EXPLANATION* 


399 


two who were sent represented Peter and Paul ; the one, who was 
about to be the Apostle of the Jews, the other, who was to become 
the Apostle of the Gentiles. For Paul was not as yet converted to 
Christ With greater probability, Jansen thinks these two were Peter 
and John : for soon after this Christ sent them to prepare the paschal 
lamb. But no hing is certain. 

Saying, &c. Greek, «2c K&pTjy Karivam hfi&y, i.e., into the village 
which is opposite to you. From whence it is plain that it is not 
Jerusalem which is meant, as Lyra thinks, but either Bethphage, as 
Jansen supposes, or some village opposite to Bethphage, as Adricho- 
mius thinks. For Christ had already come to Bethphage, as I have 
said in verse i ; unless you prefer to understand when He came to 
Bethphage , when He was coming to or approaching Bethany. 

And straightway ye shall find, &c. Christ here beheld things 
absent, the ass and her colt, as though they were present He surely 
made them known to His Apostles by the gift of prophecy, which 
His Divinity bestowed upon His humanity. Thus He here gave a 
proof of His Divinity. 

Hear how blessed Peter Damian tropologically applies all the cir- 
cumstances of this journey to the conversion of a sinner. (Horn, in 
Bom . Palm.) “ Bethphage is interpreted to mean, the house of the 
mouth; and it is the understanding of the priests , by which confession 
is meant Thither the Lord cometh, because He kindles the heart 
to make confession. The castle (as the Latin has instead of village ), 
which is opposite to the Lord and His disciples, is a mind obstinately 
bent upon its own will. The two disciples who are sent to it are 
Hope and Fear. The ass and her colt tied are Humility and Sim- 
plicity. For the mind of such a person sometimes knows what 
humility and simplicity are, and how he ought to live humbly and 
simply. But he, as it were, binds them, and sets them aside, when 
he is not willing to live accordingly. This man fear terrifies, when 
he draws back from evil, threatening him with torments. Hope 
comforts him if he repents, by the promise of rewards. By these 
two the mind is pricked. The ass and the colt are loosed, when 
meeting the Lord in the way to Bethphage, he confesses that he hath 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


400 


8. MATTHEW, XXL 


sinned, and promises that he will live humbly and simply for the 
time to come. And thus he who aforetime was a castle of the devil 
becomes Sion, the city of our strength. The Saviour is placed in it 
for a wall and a bulwark. The wall is humility, the bulwark is 
patience. Therefore, dearly beloved, let us go forth to meet the 
Lord at Bethphage, pricked with fear of punishment, and strengthened 
by the hope of heavenly life, confessing our sins with humility and 
simplicity, treading down the garments of our carnality, that the Lord 
may deign to sit upon us, and to bring us with Himself into the 
Heavenly Jerusalem.” 

And if any man, Sec. The Lord: for I am indeed Messiah, the 
Lord and God of all things. Christ did not wish that the ass and 
her colt should be taken away against the owner's will. For as His 
Providence worketh mightily, so also sweetly. By the power of His 
Divinity He influenced their minds, so that they should assent to the 
Apostles loosing the ass, yea that they should cooperate with them. 

Christ, Who for three years had always gone on foot, and thus haa 
traversed the whole of Judea, wished to show that He was the King 
of Judea, the Messiah, the Son of David. Therefore does He enter 
Jerusalem, which was the metropolis of Judea in regal pomp. But 
He is not carried on a horse with splendid trappings, or in a gilded 
chariot, with an acompanying multitude of noble knights, with trum- 
pets sounding, resplendent in purple robes, as the kings of the earth 
are wont to do. But He is carried on an ass, to show that His king- 
dom is of another sort, spiritual and heavenly, and therefore meek 
and lowly, despising pomp. Nevertheless asses in Judea are better 
and stronger than our asses, more like mules. The sons of princes 
were accustomed to ride on asses. (See Judg. xil 14.) “ Christ,” says 
Audor Imperfecti, “ sits upon the ass of tranquillity and peace, which 
is most patient to bear labours and burdens. You see not round 
about Him glittering swords, or the other ornaments of dreadful arms. 
But what do you see? leafy boughs, the tokens of affection. He 
came in meekness that he might not be dreaded because of His 
power, but that he might be loved for His gentleness.” 

All this was done , & c. The prophet , Zachariah. Tell ye the 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



DAUGHTER OP SION. 


401 


daughter of Sion . Some think these words are a quotation from 
Isaiah briL n, as though Matthew put the quotation together from 
Isaiah and Zechariah. More simply, F. Lucas and others think 
Christ cited Zechariah only, but his meaning, not his exact words. 
Till ye therefore the daughter of Sion is the same as, exult greatly (the 
Hebrew meod is very much), O daughter of Sion, shout O daughter of 
fcrusalem, as Zechariah has (ix. 9), for thy King Messias is coming 
to thee to save thee. Zechariah is exhorting the citizens of Jerusalem 
to receive with eagerness their Messiah and Saviour riding on an ass. 

Observe : Jerusalem is called the daughter of Sion, either by synec- 
doche, in that from Sion, the higher part of the city, the whole was 
called Sion ; or else by a metaphor, in that the city of Jerusalem, 
lying below Mount Sion, and protected by it, and reposing like a 
daughter on her mother’s bosom, was called the daughter of Sion. 
Moreover by Jerusalem are to be understood the citizens and inhabi- 
tants of Jerusalem. 

Mystically , these things are true in the Christian Church, which as 
Jerusalem and the daughter of Sion is the vision of peace, and there- 
fore always rejoices with Christ. 

Behold thy king, & c. Zechariah has, son of an ass, the Vulgate 
has subjugalts, under the yoke, because it bears the yoke of the man 
riding upon it 

I have explained the other things pertaining to this prophecy on 
Zechariah ix. 9. 

His disciples went, &c. The prompt obedience of the disciples 
should be remarked, which deserved the prompt compliance of the 
owner of the ass, so that he suffered his ass to be taken away to- 
gether with her foal, as Christ had predicted He doubted not 
that they would be brought back to him. 

And they brought, &c., spread their clothes, Gr. Ifxana, i.e., their 
cloaks, or outer garments, as it were in adornment. Placed Him 
thereon : many existing MSS. together with the Syriac have, He sat 
upon him, Le., the colt It is most probable that Christ sat both 
upon the ass as well as her colt in succession. First He made use 
of the ass, then of the colt. The colt perchance was not strong 

VOL. II D D 


Digitized by 



402 


S. MATTHEW, XXI. 


enough to bear a rider in the descent and ascent of the mountain : 
the ass was not so becoming for the entry into the city. But it was 
chiefly because of the mystery implied that He willed to make use 
of both the beasts, that he might signify that He should reign not 
over those only to whom He had been promised, i.e., the Jews, but 
over the two sorts of people of which the world is made up— the 
Jews, accustomed to the yoke of the Mosaic law, who were repre- 
sented by the ass ; and the Gentiles, living up to this time without 
the Law of God, and who were denoted by the colt “ For as 
sinners,” says Auctor Impcrfecti, “are the horses of the devil, so are 
the saints said to be the horses of Christ, although Christ loves mild 
asses, rather than fierce and proud horses.” 

These disciples, together with the multitude, were inspired and 
acted upon by the Holy Ghost, or else by Christ’s own Divinity to make 
the adornment of this royal pomp. They clothed the ass with their 
garments as with regal trappings \ and they made Christ to sit 
thereon, that they might render ttim homage as the Messiah, and 
inaugurate His reign as King of Jerusalem. Christ instigated and 
directed it all, that He might give an idea of His kingdom, united, 
however, with poverty and humility, for which reason he rode upon 
a despised and lowly ass. 

Observe: Christ wished to adorn His royal entrance into Jeru- 
salem with this unaccustomed pomp for various reasons. The first 
was that he might give an indication of His royal power and magni- 
ficence, because the Jews thought that He would come in such a 
manner, like another Solomoa Christ therefore presented Himseli 
to them with this appearance of pomp, that they might not despise 
and reject Him as they had hitherto done. And yet He acted in 
such a manner as to show them that Messiah’s kingdom was spiritual 
rather than temporal And He willed that all these things should be 
foretold by Zechariah, lest the Jews should despise this King when He 
came without royal dignity. So S. Chrysostom and Eusebius (lib. 8, 
demonst. c. 4). The second and accompanying reason was that Christ 
would present Himself to the Scribes and Pharisees in His royal 
entrance, that they might, ar they ought to, be able to recognise Him 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



PALM SUNDAY. 


403 


by this means to be the Messiah, forasmuch as He had been so 
prophesied of by Zechariah. The third reason was, that He might 
correspond to the type of the Paschal Lamb. For it, on the tenth 
day of the first month, was brought with solemn pomp into the city, 
that it might be sacrificed on the fourteenth day. So Christ, as the 
Lamb of God, which taketh away the sins of the world, entered into 
Jerusalem on the tenth, or Palm Sunday. And He entered in pomp 
and with the auspicious acclamations of the multitude, forasmuch as 
He was certain of triumphing over death and sin and hell, and so 
made His triumph to precede His battle, and in triumph He entered 
on His contest. 

The fourth reason was tropological — viz., that He might by this 
deed deride the world’s glory ; forasmuch as He knew that five days 
after He would be crucified by those by whom He had been honoured 
at this entry, and that those who were now crying out Hosanna to the 
Son of David would cry before Pilate’s judgment-seat, Crucify Him , 
crucify Him ; and, therefore, that this city would* be utterly destroyed 
by the Romans, under Titus. Wherefore, even in this joyful entry, 
foreseeing this, He wept, as Luke says (xix. 41). Again, He would 
teach that His kingdom consists in this life of suffering and the 
cross, and that we must not turn away from them, but embrace them 
and come to them with a joyful mind and with solemn pomp. 
Wherefore, the martyrs, as followers of Christ, went to their martyr- 
dom as to a banquet — yea, to a kingdom and a triumph — with white 
robes, and attended with throngs of the faithful. Thus did S. 
Agatha, S. Cecilia, S. Agnes, S. Laurence, &c. 

A great multitude , &c. ; branches , of palms, olives, and other fruit 
trees, in which the Mount of Olives abounds, as S. Jerome says : 
for this multitude, not having carpets (which are accustomed to be 
laid down for royal progresses), laid down their garments for Christ, 
stripping themselves as a notable mark of their reverence for Him. 
These things happened on the twentieth of March ; for in Palestine, 
which is a hot country, the trees are then in full leaf 

TYopologically. Remigius says: “ The Lord came to Jerusalem 
sitting upon an ass, because He presides over the holy Church and 

d d a 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



404 


S. MATTHEW, XXL 


the faithful soul, and rules it in this life, and afterwards introduces 
it to the vision of the celestial country. The Apostles and other 
Doctors placed their garments upon the ass, because they gave to 
the Gentiles the glory which they had received from Christ. But 
the multitude spread their garments in the way, because those of 
the circumcision who believed despised the glory which they had 
from the Law. And they cut down branches from the trees, because 
they received testimonies from the prophets, who flourished, as it 
were, from Christ, the Tree. Or the multitude which strawed their 
garments in the way signifies the martyrs, who gave their bodies, the 
garments of their souls, to martyrdom for the sake of Christ Or 
they who tame their bodies by abstinence are signified. But they 
who cut down branches from the trees are those who search for the 
sayings and examples of the holy Fathers, for the salvation of them- 
selves and of their children.” 

But the multitudes which went before , &c. S. John (xii. 12) says : 
On the morrow— i.e., Palm Sunday, or the day after the Sabbath, on 
which Jesus had come to Bethany — “much people that were come 
to the feast, when they heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem, 
*ook branches of palm trees, and went forth to meet Him, and cried, 
Hosanna : Blessed is the King of Israel that cometh in the name of 
the Lord ” — that is, Messias, whom, as the Divine king, we have 
been expecting for so many thousand years. The multitude went 
out to meet Him with palms, as a conqueror, because formerly 
victors in the games were crowned with palms. Thus the Church 
expounds when, in the Benediction of Palms, she chants thus: 
“Therefore the branches of palms anticipate the triumph over the 
king of death ; the sprays of olives verily, as it were, cry aloud that 
the spiritual anointing has come. For even then that blessed multi- 
tude of people understood that it was prefigured that the Redeemer, 
grieving for the misery of the human race, was about to fight with 
the prince of death for the life of the whole world, and to triumph 
by dying. Therefore they obediently rendered such services, which 
should set forth in Him both the triumphs of His victory and the 
riches of His meicy.” For although the multitude did not know 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


HOSANNA. 


405 


that in four days Christ was about to suffer upon the Cross, He 
knew it, and therefore He willed that this His triumph should be 
foreshown by the multitude with palms. And they brought Christ, 
as it were the Lamb which taketh away the sins of the world, who 
was to be offered for its salvation upon the following Friday. For 
although they were at this time ignorant of the mystery of which 
the paschal lambs were types and figures, God, who foreknows all 
things, ordained them for the glory of Christ Zechariah had pre- 
dicted them, and so had David (Psalm cxviii. 25, &c.) ; and therefore 
the Jews, who would not believe in Christ, were without excuse. All 
this bringing the paschal lamb to Jerusalem was done in accordance 
with the law (Exodus xii. 3, 6), where the paschal lamb is ordered 
to be chosen on the tenth day of the first month. The tenth of 
Nisan fell that year on Palm Sunday, which was — according to our 
computation — that year the twentieth of March. 

Hosanna . So the Egyptian and Arabic. The Syrian has Ouschano , 
the Ethiopic Husanna , the Persian Husiana . You will ask what is 
the meaning of Hosanna? 1. S. Hilary, on this passage, and from 
him S. Ambrose, think that Hosanna signifies the redemption of the 
house of David But S. Jerome ( Epist. ad Dam.} shows that this is 
a mistake. 

2. S. Austin {Tract. 51 in Joan.) thinks Hosanna is an interjection 
of joy and supplication, like well done / bravo / 

3. Eutliymius says Hosanna means praise , being derived from TP, 
hoz — i.e., strength^ which the Vulgate and LXX sometimes trans- 
late praise— and nan, chanah , Le., grace. Whence also the Greeks 
represent Ho sanna by two words. 

But I say with S. Jerome, Theophylact, Pagninus, Jansen, and 
others that Hosanna is compounded of penn, hoscha , save , and to 
na, i.e., I beseech. Hosanna is therefore, save , I beseech) or save now. 
Hoscanna has been changed into Hosanna for the sake of euphony. 

There is an allusion to Psalm cxviii. 25, 26, “Save me,” though the 
word me is not in the Hebrew (for it seems to be not the voice of 
Christ but of the people praying for salvation from Christ), “O Lord, 
send now prosperity. Blessed be He that cometh in the name of 


Digitized by Google 



406 


8* MATTHEW, XXL 


the Lord.” Symmachus translates, 11 1 beseech, 0 Lord, save me, 
I beseech/' The Hebrew is, Anna Jehovah, hoscia na; anna Jehovah, 
hatslicha na, i.e., 0 Lord, save, I beseech; 0 Lord, prosper I beseech, 
our King David and his antitype, Messiah. Give him a happy 
beginning of his reign, a happier progress in it, and a most happy 
conclusion. Hosanna , then, is an acclamation to the new king of 
Israel, at his proclamation, as we say, God save the King. 

Hence, too, we have in the same Psalm, “ This is the day which 
the Lord hath made ; we will rejoice and be glad in it ” (ver. 24) : 
and the reason is given in the two previous verses, “The stone 
which the builders refused is become the head stone of the comer. 
This is the Lord’s doing \ it is marvellous in our eyes.” Where the 
Chaldee (paraphrase) applies it to David. David being first rejected, 
and afterwards made king, was, as it were, a comer stone, binding to 
himself Judah and Jerusalem, i.e., the two, as well as the ten tribes. 
Still better does S. Matthew explain it of Christ, thus, Christ being 
rejected by the Jews in life, and crucified in death, became the comer 
stone of the Church after His resurrection, as containing and con- 
necting the whole edifice of the Church by uniting both Jews and 
Gentiles in the one bosom of His Church ; and thus it is that we 
sing Hosanna unto Him. 

Some think Hosanna was taken from the Feast of Tabernacles, 
when the Jews, rejoicing with boughs of trees, were wont frequently 
to cry Hosanna. And in prayers and litanies to God, the whole 
multitude used to respond with the same word, Hosanna, i.e., save 
us. As Christians in their litanies at each of the suffrages relating 
to pestilence, famine, war, and so on, respond, Good Lord, deliver us. 
Wherefore also the Jews were accustomed to call the boughs them- 
selves Hosanna, as Angelus Caninius shows from the Chaldee, the 
Talmud, and Elias {Tract, de nomin. Heb. c. 4). But this Hosanna of 
the Chaldee paraphrast and the Talmudists was subsequent to our 
Christian Hosanna, so that it was rather taken from ours than ours 
from theirs. Besides, the Hosanna of the Feast of Tabernacles was 
one of affliction and deprecation, but the Hosanna in this place of 
Christ was one of jubilation and triumph. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



THE SON OP DAVID. 


407 


This multitude, therefore, broke forth by God’s inspiration into 
this joyful shout of Hosanna , in honour of Christ, even as the 
children did in verse 15. Although the occasion of it was the 
remembrance of that great miracle, viz., the raising of Lazarus, 
which had been performed shortly before by Christ in Bethany, as 
is plain from John xi. 15, and xii 9, 17. 

7 b the Son of David ; many of the ancients refer these words to 
the multitude, as if they asked for salvation from their own Messiah. 
Hosanna to the Son of David, Le., our salvation is from the Son of 
David. Or, let salvation come to us from the Son of David. So 
Origen, S. Jerome, Bede, &c. 

Others refer Son of David not to Hosanna, but to saying. They 
said to the Son of David, ix., to Christ, Save me, who am thy people, 
O Son of David, i.e., Messiah, our King. 

But I say that Hosanna to the Son of David, means the same thing 
as, Save I beseech thee. Son of David. For so it should be rendered 
according to the Latin syntax. But the Greek interpreter, equally 
with the Latin, followed the Hebraism. For the Hebrew verb hoscha, 
save, is constructed with lamed, which is the sign of the dative case, 
and sometimes of the accusative. The multitude therefore besought 
God to save and prosper Messiah, that they might all be safe, and 
live happily under Him. Or still better and more simply, Hosanna 
to the Son of David, let that solemn Hosanna be made to Jesus 
sprung from David, whom we acknowledge to be the promised, and 
up to this time expected Son of David.* Let Him be, letHim happen, 
let Him be acclaimed unanimously by us. This is the voice and the 
acclamation of the people by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, acknow- 
ledging Jesus as the Son of David, i.e., the Messiah, and congratulating 
Him, as it were entering upon the kingdom of His father David, 
the restoration of which by Him had been so long expected ; in fine, 
praying for health, prosperity and all propitious things for Him 
from God, and joyfully promising the same to themselves through 
Him. For where Christ is called the Son of David, there there 


• With this line begins a translation of every word of the original Latin. 


Digitized by Google 



408 S. MATTHEW, XXI. 

is reference to the restitution of David's kingdom. So Franciscos 
Lucas. 

Moreover Caninius in the place already quoted from, thus ex 
pounds, Hosanna to the Son of Davids Le., in our hands we beai 
Hosannas, that is branches of palms, to the Son of David, that indeed 
we may honour Him as the King Messiah, and in triumph accom- 
pany Him as a victor and triumphing. Or, Hosanna to the Son of 
David, that is, cut ye down boughs, which as Hosanna ye may offer 
to the Son of David. As the Poet says, “ Give ye lilies with full 
hands.” But one thing was the Hosanna of the Feast of Tabernacles, 
namely like a certain Litany, another thing that of the crowd here 
by Hosanna to Christ, proclaiming and congratulating His triumph, 
as I have said a little before. 

More plainly and fully you may say, that by the people it was here 
cried to Christ, Hosanna to the Son of David, meaning thus : “ O Lord 
save not only our Messiah, David’s Son and Heir, bat grant also 
to Him the power of saving all the faithful believing in Him, and 
subject unto Him, that Thy Divine salvation may be so abundantly 
derived from Thee to Christ that He may cause the same to emanate 
and flow forth unto us. For verbs of the conjugation Hiphil have a 
specially active force, whence they often signify a double action. 
Hosca therefore, t\e>, save, signifies, save Christ, and at the same time 
cause that He should save His subjects, that in truth, even as He is 
called, so He may verily be Jesus, Le., the Saviour of the World. 
For Jesus is derived from pw» iasca, Le., he hath saved, which in Hiphil, 
the action being augmented, makes pern hosca. From this cause the 
translator gives, to the Son of David, in the dative, whereas otherwise 
it might be translated, the Son of David, in the accusative. For the 
dative signifies, that salvation, ix., the power of saving all men, as it 
were, appropriated to Him alone was given to Christ by God. 
Note this, because as far as I know it has not been observed by 
any one. 

Here, therefore, Christ as the glorious, powerful and triumphant 
King of Israel, whom none can resist, is as it were installed in 
Jerusalem, the royal city, in which formerly David and Solomon the 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



THE KINGDOM OF MESSIAH. 


409 


ancestors of Christ had gloriously reigned, that He might restore 
their fallen kingdom, yea perfect it ; and instead of its being earthly, 
make it heavenly ; divine, instead of human ; eternal, instead of 
temporal. Him furthermore the people by Hosanna partly applaud, 
partly pray for salvation for Him, i.e. f felicity and every good thing. 
This is what Mark says (xi. 9, 10).“ And they that went before, and 
they that followed, cried, saying, Hosanna ; Blessed is he that cometh 
in the name of the Lord : Blessed be the kingdom of our father 
David, that cometh in the name of the Lord : Hosanna in the highest. 

Moreover Christ as it were entered into this His kingdom of the 
Church, five days afterwards, on the day before the Passover, when 
He triumphed on the Cross over sin, the world, the devil and hell, 
and delivered all nations from their power as far as He was con- 
cerned, and subjugated them. Wherefore the Church in her Votive 
Mass of the Passion of Christ, sings to Him, “To Thee be glory, 
Hosanna; to Thee triumph and victory: to Thee the crown of 
highest praise and honour, Alleluia.” Hence too the Church in the 
Benediction of Palms prays to God that, “carrying palms and 
branches of olives, we may with good deeds run to meet Christ and 
may through Him enter into eternal joy.” 

Blessed (supply, may He be) who cometh (Greek, 6 ipxtyeroc, i.e., He 
coming , viz., who was about to come, who was expected) in the name of 
the Lord. It means, may God bless, further, prosper, and make 
glorious the Kingdom of Messiah, our King. For He cometh to us 
in the name of the Lord, Le., He is authorised, sent, and endowed by 
the Lord. Thus in Jeremiah (iv. 16) it is said, “ Thou hast spoken 
to us in the name of the Lord,” #>., by the commandment, authority, 
and in the place of God. And (chap. iii. 17), “All nations shall be 
gathered together unto it (Jerusalem) in the name of the Lord.” 
There is an allusion to Psalm xlv. 3, “ Gird Thee with Thy sword 
upon Thy thigh, O most Mighty,” &c., “Press forward, proceed 
prosperously, and reign.” “For Christ is the King of Israel,” says 
S. Augustine (in Joan. cap. xii. 23), “in that He rules minds; that 
He counsels for eternity ; that He leads those who believe, hope, and 
love, to the Kingdom of Heaven.” 


Digitized by Google 


410 


S. MATTHEW, XXI. 


Tropologically , Remigius : Christ, he says, comes in the name of the 
Lord, because in all His good works He sought not His own glory, 
but the glory of the Father. 

Hosanna in the highest: Jansen explains it as though it were said, 
“ Thou, O Lord, who art, and who dwellest in the highest Heavens, 
save Messiah.” Better Franc. Lucas, Maldonatus, and others, take 
the preposition a, in, for p, min, Le., from , according to the Hebrew 
construction, as though it were said, “ Thou, O Lord, from Heaven, 
yea from the highest top of Heaven, save and prosper King 
Messiah.” For they prayed for Messiah, not earthly and transitory 
salvation from man; but divine, heavenly, and eternal from God, 
viz., that God would divinely save Him, and give Him the power of 
saving others ; that, indeed, Christ by His grace would lead all His 
faithful and holy ones to the eternal salvation, felicity, kingdom, and 
glory. Hence Origen explains Hosanna to mean restitution to life 
eternal. For this is intimated by the words, in the highest, or as he 
himself reads, in the lofty , that in truth this salvation must be sought 
for not on earth, but in Heaven. Again, S. Jerome says, “ The 
advent of Christ is shown to be the salvation of the whole world, 
joining earthly things to heavenly.” The Gloss adds, in the lofty, 
because Christ is the salvation even of the angels, whose number 
He fills up. Whence Emm. Sa adds that even the angels who are 
in the high places are here invited to the triumph and praise of 
Christ Messiah. Wherefore S. Luke (xix. 38), instead of Hosanna, 
has peace in Heaven, that is, safety, prosperity, and every good 
thing (for this is what peace denotes to the Hebrews) be from 
Heaven to Messiah, and through Him may they flow, and rain from 
God upon us ; and glory on high (supply) may there be to God, the 
giver to Messiah. Or rather, glory, viz., of the kingdom, firm, great, 
and constant, this is a glorious kingdom; in, i.e., from on high, 
understand, from Heaven let there be divinely given to our Messiah. 
So Franc. Lucas. Again, more loftily, Peace in Heaven (let there be), 
namely, that God, until now angry with men, may be propitious to 
Christ, and through Christ to us ; and may He reconcile angels to 
men, Heaven to earth, God to the synagogue. “ Hence some,*' 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



Christ's triumphal entry. 


4ii 


says S. Chrysostom, “ interpret Hosanna , glory — others, the Resur- 
rection ; for also glory is due to Him, and redemption belongs to 
Him, who all hath redeemed." Meaning, let glory and praise be to 
the God of all things who is on high. The angels sang the same s* 
the birth of Christ But Hosanna properly signifies not glory, but 
salvation. But our salvation through Christ was the glory of God. 
In another sense, in the preface of the Sacrifice of the Mass, at the 
Trisagion, Holy, Holy, Holy, is added. “ Hosanna in the highest. 
Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord," that, indeed, 
we should pray not for Christ, but for ourselves, through Christ, for 
salvation, by asking that He also may by all be blessed, worshipped, 
praised, and may in turn copiously pour forth His blessings and 
graces upon us. Luke adds (xix. 41), And when He drew near , 
beholding the city , He wept over it, saying, because thou shouldst have 
known, even thou, &c. Because He foresaw and foretold its dreadful 
punishment and destruction by Titus and Vespasian. 

Verse 10. And when He was come into Jerusalem, all the city was 
moved, saying, Who is this t Who with so great honour, applause, 
congratulation, as it were the King of Israel, enters into Jerusalem, 
whilst the Scribes and Pharisees are looking on — yea, the Roman 
soldiers of Tiberius Caesar, who would not suffer another than Caesar 
to be called King of Judaea ? Wherefore Christ, now bearing Him- 
self as a king, would have come into peril of death, had not He, 
by the power of His Divinity, struck not only all the Jews but the 
Romans with amazement, and rendered them as it were thunder- 
struck, so that no one should dare to lay hands upon Him, nay, 
tor even think of such a thing. So Abulensis and others. 

But the people said, This is Jesus, the prophet of Nazareth, of 
Galilee . Greek, 6 upo^Z/njc, i.e., that prophet, par excellence, who far 
surpasses and transcends all the prophets in preaching, sanctity, 
power, and miracles. Therefore He is Messias, the King of Israel. 
Of Nazareth: for although Jesus was bom at Bethlehem, yet He 
was brought up at Nazareth. Christ by this glory of His gave occa- 
sion to His death ; for the Scribes, being stirred up by it to envy 
and hatred of Him, after four days crucified Him. In truth, God — 


Digitized by Google 


412 


S. MATTHEW, XXI. 


foreknowing all things— ordered all these things, in part positively, 
in part permissively, that from them He might elicit greater good, 
namely, the redemption of the world, to be accomplished by the 
death of Christ The malice, therefore, of the Scribes fulfilled the 
counsel and decree of God concerning the death of Christ and the 
redemption of the world, as S. Peter teaches (Acts ii.) 

And Jesus entered into the Temple of God , and cast out all that 
sold. Jesus, entering into Jerusalem, did not come to the citadel 
of Sion as a second David, but to the Temple, that He might show 
that He was the Son of God the Father, Who was worshipped in the 
Temple ; that He might refer to Him the honour here ascribed by 
the people to Himself, for He had accepted it for no other end 
than that He might lead men to God. Wherefore it is not doubtful 
that Christ gave thanks in the Temple to God the Father, because 
He had manifested Him to the whole city as Messiah, yea, had 
glorified Him by the applause of all the people. Again, the first 
care of Jesus, as Pontiff and Messiah, was of the Temple. Whence, 
entering into the city, He came to that the first, that He might teach 
us to do the same. For this reason He set out His journey through 
Bethany (where He raised Lazarus) and Bethphage, which were over 
against the Temple, that through them He might proceed straight- 
way to the Temple. For as I have said (verse i), Christ — passing 
over the Mount of Olives from Bethany — proceeded directly from 
thence, through the Valley of Jehosaphat, to the golden gate, which 
pertained both to the Temple and to the city, near to which was 
the golden eagle set up by Herod. Wherefore through this gate 
there was immediate access to the Temple. See Adrichomius, in 
his account of Jerusalem, where he graphically describes this journey 
of Christ, and adds that it was said by some that this golden gate 
was wont to be shut, but that at the coming of Christ it was opened 
as by a miracle. 

Note, that by the Temple here is understood not the Holy Place, 
nor the Holy of Holies (for into the latter it was lawful only for 
the high priest, into the former only for the priests, to enter), but 
the court of the Temple ; for into this the laity were accustomed to 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



THE COURT OF ISRAEL. 


413 


enter in order to pray and behold the sacrifices, which were offered 
in the court of the Priests, before the Holy Place. For this court 
was, as it were, the people’s Temple. For Christ was not a Levitical 
priest, forasmuch as He was not sprung from Levi and Aaron. 
Wherefore He could not enter the Holy Place, nor the court of the 
Priests, but only the court of the people. Wherefore what Faustus 
the Manichee invented concerning the genealogy of Christ — as 
though He were sprung from the tribe of Levi — and His Levitical 
priesthood (apud S. Augustinum , lib. 23, contra eundem Faustum ) ; 
also what Theodosius, a prince of the Jews in the time of the 
Emperor Justinian, said (which Suidas recites under the words, 
Jesus Christus) too rashly believed by Suidas and others ; all learned 
men laugh at as dreams and most fabulous errors. Verily Vilal- 
pando (tom. 2, lib . 3, cap . 9) thinks that this court was the court of 
the Gentiles. For who can believe that these merchants penetrated 
the inner courts when they could conveniently sell their goods in 
the outer courts ? Especially because Christ in the same day and 
place had to do with Gentiles, as is plain from John xii. 20. But 
the Gentiles were not able to enter the court of the Jews, but that 
of the Gentiles, which was before the court of the Jews. This court 
then was Solomon’s porch— probably the eastern part of Solomon's 
porch, in the court of the Gentiles — in which were sold doves, sheep, 
and lambs for sacrificing in the Temple, whom Christ drove out of 
it For the ^ourt of the Gentiles was, as it were, the temple of the 
Gentiles, in which, therefore, it was not seemly to buy and sell. 

And He cast out all that sold and bought in the Temple . Not on 
Palm Sunday itself, but on the next day; for Mark (xi. n), who 
exactly and precisely relates these actions of Christ, performed each 
day from Palm Sunday until the Friday on which He suffered and 
was crucified, says, on the day following the Palm Sunday on which 
this solemn entry of Christ into the city took place — that is, on the 
Monday — were these things done by Christ in the Temple. Christ, 
therefore, on Palm Sunday entered into the city and the Temple in 
solemn pomp, and prayed in it, and gave thanks to God ; afterwards, 
about eventide He went out of the city to Bethany, with the twelve 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


414 


S. MATTHEW, XXI. 


Apostles ; and on the next day (Monday) He returned to the city 
and Temple, and drave out of it the sellers and buyers, as Mark 
relates (xL n, 12, 15). Wherefore there is here in Matthew a hyper- 
baton, or inverted historical order. For He wished to join with 
Christ’s entrance into the Temple His ejection of the buyers from 
the Temple, for the sake of brevity, lest he should be compelled to 
relate over again the entrance of Christ into the Temple on the 
following day. Moreover, Christ drove them from the Temple (that 
is, from the court of the Temple) for two reasons. The first is, 
because it was not seemly that those things should be sold in the 
Temple, but in the market-place ; for the Temple is the house of 
prayer, not of merchandise, as Christ says. The second was the 
avarice and usury of the priests. For they were wont — by their own 
people, or servants, or factors — to sell at a dear rate sheep, kids, 
doves, to those who wished to offer them in the Temple ; especially 
to those who came from a distance, and poor people, from whom 
(on account of delay in payment) they extorted gain by usury. 
Whence they are called robbers by Christ Thus S. Chrysostom and 
others. Lastly, Christ twice cast out buyers from the Temple ; the 
first time, at the beginning of His preaching (John ii. 14), the 
second, towards the end of it, four days before His death, as is plain 
from this place. So S. Chrysostom, Augustine, Euthymius, Theo- 
phylact, Jansen, Maldonatus, Toletus, and others. 

And overthrew the tables of the money-changers (Syriac, bankers \ 
and the seats of them that sold doves . Money-changers — Greek, coXAv- 
f) ttrrwv : for collyba> as S. Jerome says, means what we call sweet- 
meats, or cheap little presents — for example, of parched peas, grapes, 
raisins, and apples of various kinds. Therefore, because the colly- 
bistse who lent money might not receive usury, they took for interest 
various sorts of things that they exacted by means of these things, 
which are bought for money, what it was not lawful to take in money; 
as if Ezekiel had not spoken of this very thing, saying, “ Ye shall 
not take usury or increase.” (Ezekiel xxiL) 

With more probability Jansen and others are of opinion from 
Hesychius and Pollux that these collybistse did not lend money 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



WHO SELL DOVES. 


4*5 


but only exchanged it, so that for gold they gave silver, less for 
greater, for foreign money, domestic, and that with interest and 
profit; the collybistae therefore were the money-brokers, so called 
from KoXkvftoc, ue., small change, which people gave for handling 
money. 

Tropologically , money changers are simoniacal persons, indeed all 
sinners who profane their soul, which is the temple of God, by lusts 
and sins, according to the words, “ Know ye not that your members 
are the temple of the Holy Ghost ” (1 Cor. vl 19), and, “ if any man 
defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy ” (1 Cor. iii. 17). 
So S. Jerome, Origen and Auctor Impcrfecti. 

And the seats in which the men and women who sold doves were 
wont to sit For doves were often sold by women, who being weak, 
and unable to stand long, procure seats for themselves, according to 
the saying of Martial, “ she sits in the women’s seats all day long.” 
It is wonderful that no one withstood one poor man, as Christ was, 
overturning all the gains of the priests in the temple. Whence S. 
Jerome thinks that this was Christ’s greatest Miracle, that He alone 
could “ by the stripes of one scourge cast out so great a multitude, and 
overturn the tables, and break the seats, and do other things which a 
vast army could not have done. For something fiery and starlike 
shot from his eyes, and the majesty of the Godhead shone in His 
face.* Thus far S. Jerome. Christ therefore here showed a great 
zeal for religion and the temple, and fulfilled the words of the 
Psalm (box. 9). “ The zeal of thine house hath eaten me,” as John 
says (ii. 17). 

Mystically . They sell doves who sell the grace of the Holy 

Ghost, as orders, priesthood, and benefices. For a dove is the 
symbol of the Holy Ghost Thus Origen : “ And said unto them, 
It is written, My house shall be called the house of prayer : but 
ye have made it a den of thieves. (Isaiah lvl 7.) Arab, a cave for 
robbers . “ For a robber,” says S. Jerome, “ and he who converts the 
temple into the appearance of a robber’s den is he who makes gain 
out of religion ; and his worship is not so much the worship of God 
as an occasion of business,” because forsooth, such priests, wholly 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



416 


S. MATTHEW, XXI. 


bent on lucre, lurking in a place of honest appearance, the temple, 
as in a den, by selling at a dear rate, by usury and by other fraudu- 
lent arts and methods were wont to despoil foreigners and poor 
people, yea plunder them, as robbers do. “ For a robber," says S. 
Isidore (lib. x. etymoL litera Z.), “ is an infester of the ways,” in 
Latin latro from latendo . But latro is better derived as if from 
latero, he who lies in wait at the side of the way? And Varro (lib. 6 
de lingua Latina ) says, “ latrones (robbers) are so called from latere, 
because they have a sword at their side." And Sextus Pompeius (de 
Verb . signif litera L.) says, “ the ancients called latrones those who 
fought for hire, axo \arptlac, i.e., hire, but now highwaymen are 
called latrones because they make their attack cL latere , or because 
they lurk in secret ( latenter). n 

There is an allusion to Jeremiah viL n, where God says, u Is this 
house, which is called by My name, become a den of robbers in youi 
eyes? Behold, even I have seen it, saith the Lord.” For these 
Semi-atheists thought that they hid themselves and their wickedness 
so that they should not be seen by God, as robbers hide themselves 
and lurk in caves. 

Observe : the Temple is called the House of God, not as though 
God corporeally dwelt in it as in a house (for this S. Paul denies, 
Acts xvii. 24), but because the temple is the place appointed for 
worshipping and praying to God ; in which God hears the supplica- 
tions of those who pray. But the Temple of Christians is called 
especially the House of God because Christ the Lord corporeally 
dwells in it in the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, says S. 
Thomas. 

Tropologically : the Temple is a house not for talk, nor speculation, 
nor drinking, nor revelling, but for prayer. Let therefore those who 
profane it by gossiping, by gaping about them, by acting lasciviously, 
by drinking, see how they will be scourged by Christ For as Bede 
says (in cap. 2, Joannis), “ Those things might seem to be lawfully 
sold in the Temple which were bought with the intention of offering 
them in the same Temple to the Lord ; but the Lord Himself being 
unwilling that any earthly business, not even that which was con- 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



fcEVERENCfc DUE 1X> GOD*S HOUSE. 


41 ? 


sidered honest* should be transacted in His house, drove away the 
unjust traffickers, and cast them all out together with the things which 
they sold. What then, my brethren, what do we think the Lord 
would do if He found people quarrelling, or listening to fables, or 
giving way to laughter, or entangled in any other wickedness, when 
He saw those who were buying in His Temple victims which were 
to be offered to Himself, and made haste to cast them out? 1 ’ 
Especially when these buyers and sellers did not lodge in the Temple 
itself, stricdy speaking, but only in a court of the Temple, indeed in 
a court common to all nations ; and yet they were cast out by 
Christ from thence : what then will He do to Christians who 
perpetrate these and worse indignities in His Temple before the 
Holy Sacrament? 

Learn from hence how great reverence is due to the Temple, such 
indeed as is due to God's House, for Christ calls it My house. 
Wherefore as a master inquires into and punishes an injury done to 
his house, as though it were done to himself, so also does Christ 
look upon an indignity done to His Temple as done to Himself, 
and as such punishes and avenges it Wherefore appositely does 
S. Augustine give the monition in his rule, “Let no one do anything 
in the Oratory, except that for which it was made, from whence also 
it hath its name.” See what has been said on Isaiah lvi. 7, and 
Levit. ix. at the end of the chapter. 

Verse 14. And the blind and the lame came to Him, and He healed 
them , that by these miracles He might show Himself to be Messiah, 
yea God; and so that He had been rightly honoured by the acclama- 
tions of the people and the pomp. For Isaiah had foretold (xxxv. 5) 
that Messiah would work such miracles. And they were worthy both 
of Christ and the Temple, and Christ substituted them for the 
covetous traffic in cattle. 

Verse 15. And when the chief priests and scribes saw the wonderful 
things that He did, and the children crying in the Temple, and saying 
Hosanna to the Son of David; they were sore displeased. Both because 
they were envious of this glory of Christ, as because they were dis- 
pleased at their gains and marketings being cast out of the Temple. 

VOL. IL « 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



8. MATTHEW, XXI. 


416 

Verse 16. And said unto Him , hearest Thou what these say f And 
Jesus saith unto them , Yea; have ye never read , out of the mouth of 
babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise f (Psalm viiL 3.) The 
Hebrew is TP mo*, iissadta oz 9 i.e., hast founded strength . Aquila, hast 
laid foundations , power ; Sixtine edition, Thou hast constituted 
strength ; Tertullian (Lib. de anima f cap . 19), Thou hast furnished 
praise; Syriac, Thou hast directed praise; Arabic, Thou hast prepared 
praise. This is, Thou hast proved, confirmed, made Thy power 
perfectly laudable, when out of the mouth of infants, not having the 
use of their tongues, and not yet able to give utterance, or to speak, 
Hiou dost express Thy praise and glory. For thou hast caused that 
on Palm Sunday infants with the people should cry out to Christ, 
Hosanna to the Son of David. S. Hilary, and Auctor Imperfectly 
understand by infants boys already able to speak and give utterance. 
With more truth S. Chrysostom, Euthymius, and Theophylact think 
that these were really infants unable to speak, as it is here expressly 
said. Whence the Syriac translates, Out of the mouth of little boys 
and infants Thou hast directed praise ; and therefore Luke adds 
(xix. 40) that Christ said, If these should be silent the stones will cry 
out . By this was signified that the infants equally with the boys 
being moved and acted upon by a Divine instinct and miracle, cried 
Hosanna to Christ, though they did not understand the word, yea 
although the infants naturally were not yet able to speak it The 
reason was that which the Psalmist subjoins (Psalm viiL), “That 
Thou mayest destroy the enemy and the avenger,” that in trutli, 
through the mouths of infants Thou mayest confound the Scribes 
and Pharisees, the enemies of Christ, and mayest teach that they 
are senseless, and more foolish than infants, for these acknowledge^ 
praise, and glorify Jesus as Christ But those latter words of the 
psalm Christ did not cite, intentionally, lest He should too greatly 
exasperate the Scribes. At the same time, Christ here intimates 
that infants should be early taught, as soon as they begin to speak, 
to utter pious words— that their first words should be Hosanna f Jesus f 
Maty, &c. Thus S. Jerome writes to Blsesilla, that she should 
teach her little daughter Paula, the grandchild of her grandmother, 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



ORIGIN OF THE TRISAGION. 


4?9 


S. Paula, as soon as she began to speak, to utter and pronounce 
Alleluia. So our S. Francis Borgia was taught when an infant to 
utter as his first words, Jesus, Maria , as Ribadaneira testifies in his 
life. Thus the Trisagion, for example, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord 
God of Sabaoth, was revealed to a boy caught up into the air at 
the time of an earthquake at Constantinople, which ceased as soon 
as the people, instructed by the boy, cried the Trisagion, a.d. 446, 
in the time of the Emperor Theodosius, as Damascene testifies 
(Tract de Trisagis). For God delights in the praises of boys, for 
boys (puert) are so called from purity ( puritate ), says Varro, because 
they are not yet come to years of puberty, and are pure like 
terrestrial angels. 

Arias Montanus (in Psalm ii.) observes, that infants in all nations 
utter the word rr, iah, which is the Name of God, and an abbre- 
viation of Jehovah ; and thus God claims for Himself the commence- 
ment and foundations of His wonderful Name, firmly uttered by the 
very mouth of infants. In like manner, Arnobius asserts that there 
is no man whatsoever who has not entered upon the first day of his 
life with the idea of God ; and that the brutes, the trees, and the 
stones would cry out, if they were able to speak, that God is the 
Lord of all things. So Plato (lid. 10, de Republ.) and Cicero (lib. 1, 
de Natura Deorum) teach that we share in the knowledge and praise 
of God with our mother’s milk. Lyra -distinguishes a threefold order 
of children praising God. The first are those who praise God by 
their deaths, not with their mouths ; such as the Innocents who were 
slain by Herod for Christ’s sake. The second, such as praise with 
their mouths rather than by their deaths, like those who sang 
Hosanna to Christ The third, those who both by their mouths 
and their deaths praised God. Such were S. Agnes, thirteen years 
of age ; S. Pancras, twelve ; SS. Vitus, Celsus, and others. See our 
Philip Barlaymont (in Paradiso puerorum , cap. 13 and 14), where he 
recounts the praises and oracles of God uttered by the mouths of 
infants. 

Observe : the eighth Psalm seems to be spoken literally of God’s 
magnificence which He shows in the creation of the universe in 


Digitized by Google 


420 


S. MATTHEW, XXI. 


which He made man the lord of all things. Yet more appropriately 
and profoundly, according to the letter, it speaks of the magnificence 
of God which He manifests in the re-creation and redemption of the 
world, in which He has made Christ the conqueror of death and sin, 
and the Redeemer of the world, and the Lord of all things ; who 
therefore is the First Man, and the most noble of all men. This is 
plain — i. Because Christ here so expounds it, as S. Paul does (Heb. 
ii. 7). 2. Because such great magnificence as the Psalmist there 

celebrates does not apply so well to the misery of man — who, after 
his fall into sin, lost his dominion over the brutes — as it does to 
Christ 3. Because this passage, “ Out of the mouths of infants 
and sucklings Thou hast perfected praise,” applies much more 
clearly and truly to Christ than to any others. A like passage is 
Deuteronomy xviii. 18, as I have there said. For as to Maldonatus 
explaining it of David calling himself (in respect of Goliath, whose 
head he cut off) an infant, it is certain that he was not literally an 
infant at that time, but a spirited and warlike youth. Whence 
Nicephorus (on Psalm 8) says : “The Incarnation of the Word is 
the magnificence of God.” 

Verse 1 7. And He left them , and went out of the city into Bethany; 
and He lodged there . Syriac and Arabic, He passed the night at 
Bethany . See here the ingratitude and fickleness of the people : 
for those who that very morning had cried to Christ Hosanna , on the 
evening of the same day forsake Christ for fear of the Scribes, so 
that no one was found to invite Him to hospitality. Therefore 
Christ was forced to go out of the city to Martha and Magdalene, 
his hostesses at Bethany. 

Verse 18. Now in the morning as He returned into the city , he 
hungered. This, therefore, took place on the day after Palm Sunday, 
on Monday, the eleventh day of Nisan, the first month ; which is, 
according to our reckoning, the twenty-first of March. For three 
days afterwards (namely, on Friday in the Paschal season, which fell 
that year on the twenty-fifth day of March) Christ was crucified and 
offered up. 

He hungered Not with natural hunger, but with hunger volun- 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



WITHERING OF THE FIG TREE. 


421 


tarily excited, say S. Chrysostom and Abulensis (qucest. 103). Fof 
it was morning, and Christ had supped with Martha the evening 
previous; so that He would not so soon again be hungry. He 
stirred up, therefore, this hunger in Himself, that by it He might 
have occasion to curse the unfruitful fig tree. Wherefore, also, He 
sought figs upon it, although He knew that the time of figs was not 
yet, as Mark has (xi. 13). For this was the twenty-first of March, 
as I have said, at which time there are no figs. 

Observe : this hunger of Christ and the withering of the fig tree 
were before He cast out of the Temple the buyers and sellers. For 
He did this on this same Monday, but after the withering of the fig 
tree, as appears from Mark xi 14, &c., where he assigns the actions 
of Christ to the several days on which they were done. 

Verse 19. And when He saw a fig tree in the way , He came to it, 
and found nothing thereon, but leaves only, and said unto it, Let no 
fruit grow on thee henceforward for ever. And presently the fig tree 
withered away. Christ cursed the fig tree, and dried it up, that 
He might manifest His power, by which He was able in like manner 
to destroy and wither up the Scribes and the Jews, His enemies, if 
He wished ; and to show that He would shortly suffer the Cross 
and death at their hands, not against His will, but voluntarily. Note 
that this curse of Christ was not done proprie, but by catachresis , 
abusive . For this malediction only signifies that Christ prayed for 
evil — i.e., withering for the fig tree — which it is lawful, especially to 
Christ, for a sufficient reason to pray for, for inanimate things ; for 
to Him belong all the trees and farms of all men. See what has 
been said (Jeremiah xx. 14, and Job iii. 1). In like manner, 
S. Francis cursed a juniper tree planted by blessed Juniper, one 
of his first companions, in punishment of his disobedience. From 
thenceforward, this tree did not grow a nail’s breadth after the day 
in which it was planted in the ground. This tree is still visited at 
Carinula, or Calenum, a town of Campania Felix, near Mondrago- 
nium, in a monastery of the Friars Minor. For blessed Juniper was 
busy planting this tree, and being called by S. Francis, he delayed 
obeying the call until he had finished his work. S. Francis cursed 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



S. MATTHEW, XXI. 


422 

the tree because it had been an occasion and object of disobedience, 
and bade it grow no more ; and so it straightway happened that the 
tree obeyed the saint, in order to teach men the evil of disobedience. 
So Wadding (in Annal. Minorum , a*d. 1222, num. 11). 

Verse 20. And when the disciples saw it \ they marvelled, saying , 
Haw soon is the fig tree withered away l The Vufg. omits fig tree 9 
which is found in the Greek end Syriac. This took place on the 
following day, for Christ on the Monday returning from Bethany to 
Jerusalem cursed the fig tree : after that He cast out the buyers from 
the Temple, and taught there : in the evening He returned from the 
city to Bethany : on the Tuesday morning, as the disciples were 
returning with Him from Bethany to Jerusalem, they saw the fig tree 
dried up, and then they cried in wonder, How immediately is it dried 
up l That this is the order in which the events happened is plain 
from Mark xi. 19, 20. 

Symbolically : Christ cursed the fig tree, because a fig was the tree 
which God forbade, of which Adam ate, and ruined himself and his 
posterity, as the learned men whom I have cited (Gen. iL 9) think 
with probability. 

Allegorically : the withered fig tree denotes the Jews, who when 
Christ came, being unbelieving, lost the sap of faith and grace, and 
so bring forth no fruits of good works. Thus Origen. 

Tropologically : the fig tree, full of leaves but without figs, denotes 
believers who have the leaves of a profession of the faith but lack the 
solid fruit of virtues, and so will be cursed by Christ Thus Origen. 

Verse 2 1. Jesus answered and said unto them , Verily Isay unto you. If 
ye have faith (that excellent and efficacious faith, like a grain of mus- 
tard seed, of which, chap. xvii. 19) and doubt not , ye shall not only do 
thts which is done to the fig tree (that which ye see has been done by 
Me, as is plain from the Greek), but also ye shall say to this mountain^ 
Lift up (viz. thyself as follows, in the Greek apfiiyn, *>., as the Syriac, be 
lifted up , be rooted up out of the earth) and be thou cast (Gr. fiXIfliiTt, 
Syr Jail) into the sea , it shall be done . And shall not hesitate f Gr. 
diaxpidijre, *>., shall not dispute, as doubting and hesitating ; shall not 
distinguish whether what ye ask be easy, or hard to be done. For 
many, because they think what they ask arduous and difficult, are in 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



HOME OF THE VIRGIN MARY. 


423 


doubt whether they shall obtain it from God, and so do not obtain it 
But they do not distinguish between easy and difficult, thinking that 
what is difficult to them is easy to God, and who therefore rely on 
the Divine Omnipotence, goodness and promise, by which He has 
promised that we shall obtain from Him all things which we ask ot 
Him with certain-faith and confidence; wherefore, I say, they lift up 
their minds and hopes above their infhmity, and set them upon God, 
certainly expecting from Him the end and fruit of their prayer; such, 
I say obtain whatsoever and how much soever they ask of Him. 
This mountain, Olivet* for Jesus, proceeding by it to Jerusalem, 
there spake these things. So Abulensis ( qucest . 134), Franc. Lucas and 
others. Other things which pertain to this subject I have spoken ofj 
chapter xvii. 19. 

So on account of the infidelity of the Turks who are masters of 
the Holy Land, the Angels, a.d. 1291, transferred from Galilee and 
Nazareth the house of the Blessed Virgin (in which she, the angel 
announcing it, conceived the Son of God), to Dalmatia, and sub- 
sequendy, a.d. 1294, to Italy (Lauretum), where is the seat and the 
head of the faith and the faithful ; and therefore on account of 
that faith it works in the same place innumerable miracles, which 
our Horace Turselli relates in his History of Loretto. 

Verse 22. And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer , 
believing, ye shall receive . Believing , i.e., if ye shall believe and be 
confident that ye shall obtain those things from God, according to 
James L 6. “ Let him ask in faith, nothing doubting.” See what is 

there said. 

Well speaks S. Bernard (Serm. 15 in Psal. Qui habitat ), expounding 
tropologically the words of God to Joshua, chap. i. “ Whatsoever place 
your foot shall tread upon shall be yours.” “ Your foot,” he says “ is 
your faith, and let it go as far as it will, it shall obtain, if so 
be that it be fixed wholly upon God, that it be firm, and stumble 
not.” The reason d priori is the liberality and munificence of God, 
which does not suffer itself to be surpassed by our hope, but far sur- 
passes and transcends it. 

Verse 23. And when he was come into the temple , the chief pnests 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


4*4 


& MATTHEW, XXL 


and the elders of the people came unto Him as he was teachings and said , 
By what authority doest thou these things t And who gave thee this 
authority t By what power ( Vulg .), Greek, Hovai^, i.e., authority ; 
meaning, “ Who gave Thee right and authority to teach in theTemple ? 
to cast out of it the buyers and sellers ? and to call the people 
together to acclaim thee by Hosanna as the Teacher and the Messiah ? 

Verse 24. And Jesus answered and said unto them f I also will 
ask you one thing , which if ye tell me, I in like wise will tell you 
by what authority I do these things It is commonly said, He does 
not put an end to a suit who resolves a suit by a suit For thus 
dishonest lawyers, when they have no faith in their cause, get up 
another cause and lawsuit, so that they may quibble and escape 
condemnation. So also when the heretics cannot reply to the argu- 
ments of Catholics, they bring forward other arguments, so as to find 
a way of escape from their heresy and ignorance. But Christ does 
not here act so, but he proposes another question, on the solution of 
which depended the answer to the question proposed by the Scribes. 
Thus — “ Ye do not believe Me when I say that I have received 
power from God, believe then John the Baptist who bare witness to 
Me, that I have been sent by God to do these things.’ 9 

The baptism of John, whence was it, from Heaven or of men t By 
the baptism of John, Christ means his testimony, doctrine, and the 
whole of his preaching concerning Him. There is a synecdoche. 
This is Christ’s argument, bearing upon the Scribes with irresistible 
force. Thus, “ Ye ask, from whence I have power — from God or 
from men ? I, in reply, ask you, from whom had John power to 
preach and baptize — from God or from men? If he had that 
authority from God, as all allow, then have I the same authority 
from God. For this was the witness which John gave of Me, 
teaching that he was the servant, but I the Messiah, the Son of 
God. And this he did when ye sent messengers to him expressly 
about this very thing, to ask him if he were the Messias.” 
(John L 20, 26, 27.) 

From Heaven, come from God. Where observe : The Hebrews 
by metonyme, by which that which holds is put for what is held, 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



ETYMOLOGY OF HEAVEN. 


4*5 


call God ow, Scamaim , Le., Heaven. The Greek poets, following 
this usage, called the father of Saturn ovpavoy, and the Latins, coslum. 
Thus Caninius (de nomin. Hsbrctis % c. 2). Hence the Jews worshipped 
Heaven and the stars as God. Hence Christians who apostatized 
from Christianity to Judaism were formerly called coslicolce , against 
whom there are extant rescripts of the emperors Theodosius and 
Honorius (lib. 18, de Judceis et coslicolis ). See Baronius, A.D. 408. 
Hence also the poet sings of the Jews — 

“ They adore shining clouds and the divinity of Heaven.” 

For the Heaven by its immensity, beauty, motion, adornment, and 
influx, carries every one away with admiration of it “Whence 
Heaven” ( coslum), says Sipontius, “is so called because it is, as it 
were, sculptured (ccslatum) with stars and constellations.” But Varro 
(lib. 4, de lingud Latind) derives it from koIXoq, /.a, hollow , because 
it embraces all created things in its cavity. Hence God is, as it 
were, the Atlas of Heaven and earth, of whom Virgil says 
(lib. 6 , jEn.)— 

** Where Heaven-bearing Atlas turns round the Heaven, 

Furnished with burning stars upon his shoulders.” 

Wherefore many nations have worshipped Heaven as a god. As 
Cicero (lib. 2, de Divinat.) says, “I have always said, and I will say, 
that the race of the gods belongs to Heaven.” The same (in Somnio 
Scipionis ) says, “And I give thanks to thee, O highest sun, and to 
you the rest of the heavenly ones.” And Pliny (lib. 7, cap. 33) says, 
“Divinity and a certain most noble association of women from 
Heaven was in the Sibyl.” Hear also S. Augustine (lib. x. de Civil 
cap. 1), “And they call the gods themselves ccelicolce. for no other 
reason than that they inhabit (colanf) Heaven, not, indeed, worship- 
ping, but inhabiting — as it were, colonists (coloni) of Heaven.” 
Lastly, Heaven is the throne of God, and the seat of His majesty 
and glory, as well as of the holy angels and beatified men. 

Learn from hence to be ambitious of Heaven, to sigh after 
Heaven, to despise the earth and earthly things, and to say with 
our S. Ignatius, “How mean to me is the earth when I look at 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



426 


S. MATTHEW, XXI. 


Heaven.” For he who seeks Heaven, seeks paradise, happiness, 
a blessed eternity — he desires the God of Heaven. “ O Israel, how 
great is the house of God, and vast the place of His possession !” 
(Baruch iii. 24, See the passage.) 

But they thought within themselves , saying: Greek, Su\oyl(ovro, 
i.e.> they thought and conferred among themselves, deliberating 
what to answer Christ, being anxious and perplexed. 

If we shall say , From Heaven ; He will say unto us, Why did ye not 
then belieie him f verse 24. But if we shall say, Of men; we fear the 
people ; for all hold John as a prophet . Wherefore did ye not believe 

him, declaring Me to be Messiah, and persuading you to prepare by 
repentance for My grace and salvation? We fear the multitude, 
understand, lest they should stone us, as Luke adds (xx. 5). As a 
prophet : The word, as, is the mark of truth, not of likeness. It 
means, all held John for a true and a great prophet, and therefore 
sent by God. For a prophet is the ambassador, seer, and interpreter 
of God. Thus it is said of Christ (John 1.), “We saw His glory, the 
glory as of the Only Begotten of the Father,” where as denotes 
reality, not similitude. Meaning, “We saw the glory of Him, as 
verily the Only Begotten Son of God, or, of Him who was the true 
and Only Begotten of God.” 

And they answered Jesus and said. We know not. They lie ; for 
they had seen the life of John, as well as his most holy and divine 
preaching, sealed by his death and martyrdom for the sake of 
chastity. But dishonesty would rather lie than be convicted of 
falsehood and convinced of dishonesty. 

And He said unto them, Neither tell I you by what authority 1 do 
these things . It means, “ Ye are not willing to answer My question, 
wherefore neither will I answer yours, because the solution of yours 
depends upon Mine. But ye say that ye do not know it, and ye lie. 
I say that I know, but am unwilling to say ; and I speak the truth, 
that I may confound and put down your insolence.” For by this 
answer Christ stopped the mouth of the Scribes, so that they were 
as silent as mice, nor did they dare again to open their lips. Whence 
S. Jerome says : “ He showed that they knew, but would not answer. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



PARABLE OF THE TWO SONS. 427 

and that He knew, and did not answer, because they kept back what 
they knew. 

How someth it to you t Christ, by the following parable, con- 
victed the Scribes and Pharisees — who said that they knew not 
whether the baptism of John were from heaven or of men— of the 
utmost dishonesty and obstinacy ; because, although they wished to 
to be accounted sons of God, yet refused to receive John who was 
sent by God, and would not believe His preaching, nor do penance. 
Moreover, Christ in this place, says S. Chrysostom, brings in guilty 
the judges themselves, with a great confidence in justice, where the 
cause is entrusted to the adversary. But He employs a parable, 
that they may not perceive how they are pronouncing sentence 
against themselves : “ A certain man had two sons ; and he came 
to the first, and said, Son, go work to-day in my vineyard. He 
answered and said, I will not ; but afterwards he repented and went. 
And he came to the second, and said likewise. And he answered 
and said, I go, sir ; and went not. Whether of them twain did the 
will of his father? They say unto Him, The first. Jesus saith unto 
them, Verily I say unto you, that the publicans and the harlots go 
into the kingdom of God before you. For John came unto you in 
the way of righteousness, and ye believed him not; but the pub- 
licans and the harlots believed him : and ye, when ye had seen it, 
repented not afterward, that ye might believe him.” (Verses 28 — 32.) 

This parable scarcely needs an explanation, because Christ applies 
and explains it In truth, the first — being at the beginning unwilling 
to obey his father, but afterwards repenting and obeying, by going to 
work in the vineyard— denotes the publicans and harlots; who at 
first by their sins repelled die will and law of God, but afterwards by 
John’s preaching came to a better mind, and did penance, and lived 
chastely and justly, according to the law of God. The second son 
— who said to his father that he would go into the vineyard, but 
broke his word, and went not — denotes the Scribes and Pharisees ; 
who always had the law of God in their mouths (as though they 
were most zealous and religious observers of it), but did not fulfil it 
in their deeds, but by lust, rapine, and usury acted contrary to it 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



4^8 


& MATTHEW, XXI. 


Wherefore they provoked the heavy displeasure and anger of God 
against them, as well on account of their wickedness itself as because 
of their hypocrisy and feigned observance of the Law. For such 
hypocrisy and duplicity grievously provokes God. 

Go before — Greek icpoayovaiv, in the present tense ; future in Vulg. 
Meaning as follows : “ The publicans and harlots precede you, O ye 
Scribes, ix^ they go before you in the way of God and of virtue, and 
advance to Heaven by the pattern of faith, repentance, and change 
of life ; and therefore they will indeed precede and go before you 
into the kingdom of Heaven, into which ye wicked ones will never 
enter, although ye might enter if ye would repent and change your 
lives. Thus (chap. v. 19) the least in the kingdom of Heaven are the 
impious and the reprobate, who shall be shut out of it 

In the way of justice; the Syriac is, walking in the way of rectitude 
— leading a life perfectly just, right, holy and blameless. 

Neither repented — i.e., did not do penance. The Greek is oh 
fieri fieXrjdrjre, did not repent and amend. 

Mystically . Publicans and harlots denote the Gentiles, who at 
first were slaves to idols and vices, and afterwards were converted 
by the preaching of the Apostles, and served God and virtue. The 
Pharisees and Scribes denote the Jews, who seemed to worship God, 
but really despised Him, since they despised Christ who was sent 
by Him, and hardened their hearts in this perfidy. Whence S. 
Jerome, S. Chrysostom, Origen, S. Athanasius, Bede, Euthymius, 
Maldonatus, Jansen, and others, passim , interpret the parable of 
them. 

Tropologically. Christ shows, says S. Chrysostom, that the popu- 
lace and plebeians, who some time or other are converted, are better 
than priests who are never converted. 

Iropologically . Ordinary Christians and lay people who, from a 
desire of holiness, keep evangelical counsels, although they are not 
bound to them by vow or profession, are like the first son. Priests, 
monks, and religious, who have taken vows of poverty, chastity, and 
obedience, and afterwards break them, are like the second son. 

“ Hear another parable : There was a certain householder, which 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



PARABLE OF THE VINEYARD. 


4*9 

planted a vineyard, and hedged it round about, and digged a wine- 
press in it, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went 
into a far country : and when the time of the fruit drew near, he 
sent his servants to the husbandmen, that they might receive the 
fruits of it And the husbandmen took his servants, and beat one, 
and killed another, and stoned another. Again, he sent other servants 
more than the first : and they did unto them likewise. But last of all 
he sent unto them his son, saying, They will reverence my son. But 
when the husbandmen saw the son, they said among themselves, 
This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and let us seize on his 
inheritance. And they caught him, and cast him out of the vine- 
yard, and slew him. When the Lord, therefore, of the vineyard 
cometh, what will he do unto those husbandmen ? They say unto 
Him, He will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let out his 
vineyard unto other husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in 
their seasons " (Verses 33 — 41). Christ turns the point of this parable 
against the Scribes and Pharisees, His adversaries ; but borrows it 
from Isaiah (v. 1), that He may add weight to it, so as to press and 
convince them. For Isaiah there made use of it, and predicted 
that Christ would use it For Isaiah begins his fifth chapter thus : 
44 1 will sing to my beloved (Christ Incarnate) a song of my kinsman 
of his vineyard. A vineyard has been made for my beloved in the 
horn of a son of oil ” ( Vulg.) — ***, in a horn of olives, meaning in 
Judaea, which was strong and lofty like a horn, and fertile and rich 
like an olive. I have expounded this at length on Isaiah v. ; from 
whence I will repeat summarily what has been there said, and will 
go through the whole parable in a few words. 

1. The man planting a vineyard is God founding the Church, or 
synagogue, according to Psalm lxxx. 9. 44 Thou hast transplanted a 
vine out of Egypt, Thou hast cast out the nations (from Canaan), 
and there planted the vine,” #.*., the Synagogue, or Temple of the 
Jews. 

2. The hedge , the wine press and the tower erected in the vine- 
yard signify that God provided abundantly for His Church all things 
necessary. Literally however by the hedge you may understand, 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



43 ° 


S. MATTHEW, XXI. 


with S. Jerome, the wall of Jerusalem ; or strong princes like David 
and the Maccabees, with the Interlinear ; or the Law, with Auctor 
Imperfect % and S. Irenaeus (lib. 4. cap . 70). Whence instead of 
hedged it round about , the Syriac has, protected it on all sides by a 
wall. 

The wine press is the Altar where the blood of the victims was 
poured out So Origen, S. Jerome, Bede, Theophylact, Euthymius. 
The wine press is said to be dug, because formerly small lakes were 
cut out, or dug, for the purpose. Or as Mark says (xiL 1) a lake : 
where they received the new wine pressed from the grapes by the 
press. This is plain from Isaiah v. a. Tropologically , the wine press 
says S. Jerome, denotes the martyrs, Whence the Psalms viii. lxxxi 
and bouriv. are entided, For the wine presses . But S. Hilary thinks 
the prophets are meant, into whom the richness of the Holy Ghost 
very warmly flowed. S. Chrysostom by the wine press understands 
the word of God, which presses and torments man, through the 
opposition of the flesh. 

The tower of the vineyard, i.e., of the synagogue was the temple 
of Jerusalem, and God’s worship there. So Origen, the Chaldee, & 
Hilary, Bede, Theophylact, Euthymius. Mystically , the prophet^ 
pastors and teachers, together with the kings and princes of the 
people were the tower. For they as from a tower were the watchmen 
of the people. So the same. Whence S. Hilary says, n A tower 
denotes the eminence of the law, which towered towards heaven, 
and from which the Advent of Christ might be watched for. 

3. The inhabitants of the vineyard were the princes of the people ; 
for it is their part to rule and guide the people. To work in the vine- 
yard, is to do justice, says S. Chrysostom. 

4. God went into a Jar country, because, as Origen says, when He 
had given His law and covenants to the Jews, appearing to them on 
Mount Sinai, He did not afterwards appear to them, as though He 
had gone elsewhere. 

5. The time of fruits, Le., of the observance of the law and 
worship oi God was in the time of David, Solomon, Josaphat, 
Hezekias, Josias, &c., when the Jews were able to live quietly to 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



EVERY ONE HAS HIS VINEYARD 


43 * 


themselves and to God, as they ought. Or rather this time was 
always ; because they were always bound to serve God, and bring 
forth the fruit of good works. Whence Maldonatus thinks this 
pertains to the figures and adornment of the parable. 

6. The servants sent by God to the vineyard \ i.e., the synagogue, to 
gather its fruits were Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and the rest of the 
prophets, whom the Jews killed, because they reproved their vices, 
stoning some of them, as Jeremiah. And He sent them a second 
time, and more than the first, that by His diligence and His love He 
might overcome the wickedness of the husbandmen. Whence S. 
Chrysostom says, il Through all the grades of wickedness the mercy 
of God went on increasing, and through all the steps of God’s mercy, 
the wickedness kept increasing.” Wherefore at length God sent unto 
them His Son, that is Christ, now Incarnate, whom as the Heir of 
the Synagogue, the Scribes both slew and crucified without the city, 
ie., outside of Jerusalem, on Mount Calvary, that they themselves 
might preside over and rule the synagogue, and enrich and magnify 
themselves by means of it Instead of they will reverence My Son 9 
the Syriac has, they will be ashamed on account of My Son. 

Lastly, every one’s vineyard that he must till is his soul. To a pastor 
it is his parish : to a bishop, his diocese : to a magistrate, the state ; 
that they may bring forth the fruit of good works and virtues. The 
hedge is the laws and statutes : the keepers are the angels : the tower 
is meditation, reason, forethought : the wine press is tribulation, morti- 
fication, the cross. “ A servant is sent,” says Rabanus, " when the 
law, a psalm, or a prophecy is read : he is cast out when they are 
blasphemed or despised. He kills the heir, who tramples on the Son 
of God, and does despite to the Spirit of grace. The vineyard is 
given to another when the humble receive the grace which was 
despised by the proud.” 

Moreover, The man planting the vineyard is God, who is called a 
man, says S. Chrysostom, by similitude, not reality. By nature He 
is Lord, by kindness Father, according to the words in Isaiah 
“The vineyard of the Lord of Sabaoth is the house of Israel.” 

They (the Scribes) say unto Him , He will miserably destroy those 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 


A 



432 


S. MATTHEW, XXI. 


wicked men . You will say, Mark and Luke assert that Christ said 
this; how then does Matthew attribute the same words to the 
Scribes ? I may reply with S. Chrysostom and Euthymius, that the 
Scribes said it first, and afterwards Christ repeated and confirmed 
the same, in such manner and gesture that from thence, and from 
what preceded and followed (as Abulensis rightly observes, queest 20), 
the Scribes sufficiently understood that it was spoken of them; and 
then they added, God forbid, as Luke has (c. xx. 16). 

He will miserably destroy the wicked : namely, the wicked ones of 
the vineyard, the husbandmen of the Church, or the Scribes, 
with their followers, who killed the prophets and Christ God will 
destroy them by Titus and Vespasian in this life, and by the devils 
in hell. 

And will let out His vineyard to other husbandmen (viz., the Aposdes 
and their successors), who shall rendet to Him the fruits in their 
seasons . This fruit of the vineyard, Le., of the Church of God, is 
made manifest in the conversion of the whole world to the faith and 
holiness of Christ, and especially in the constancy of so many 
thousands of virgins and martyrs. The rejection of the Jews and 
the conversion of the Gentiles are here foretold, as Christ teaches, 
verse 43. 

Moraliter; learn from hence that, like as a vineyard produces 
good grapes even if those who till it be evil, so does the Church and 
her faithful members produce the good works of virtues, even though 
her pastors and teachers be sometimes evil, like the Scribes. Yet 
will they bring forth more and larger fruits if the pastors are good, 
as is plain from the Apostles, whose Apostolic virtues the primitive 
believers imitating, excelled in chastity, charity, patience, and all 
virtues. Zeuxis, a famous painter, is an illustration of this emblem. 
He painted a boy with a basket of grapes so skilfully and beauti- 
fully as to deceive the birds ; for the birds flew to these grapes as 
though they were real, and pecked at them, to try to eat them. 
Then Zeuxis said, modestly, “ I have painted the grapes better than 
I have the boy ; for the birds fly to the grapes, and do not fear 
the boy, who stands there, as bemg only a picture.” Thus the shep- 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



THE REJECTED STONE. 


433 


herds and keepers of the Church are frequently depraved, and badly 
depicted ; but the grapes, *>., the works of the people, are better 
and more beautiful. By the carelessness of the keepers — ie., of the 
pastors — it comes to pass that they become the prey of the birds — 
that is, of the demons — by whom they are devoured. 

Verse 42. Jesus saith unto thorn, Did ye never read in the Scrip- 
tures , T?u stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head 
of the comer: this is the Lord's doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes t 
Christ cites Psalm cxviiL 22, where David speaks and prophesies of 
Christ And the Scribes knew this. Wherefore they understood 
that they were marked and censured in this sentence by David as 
well as Christ The meaning is : the Scribes, Priests, and Pharisees 
as the builders of the Synagogue — i.e., of the Jewish Church — cast 
Christ from it as a worthless stone ; indeed, as being hurtful to it, 
they condemned and killed Him. For the Scribes, whom He had 
previously called labourers and husbandmen, He now calls builders, 
says S. Jerome. But this stone rejected by the Jews is made by 
God the Head of the comer. That is, it was placed at the head of 
the comer, and was made the chief and altogether fundamental 
stone of the Church, and at the same time the comer stone, so a9 to 
join and connect the two walls of the Gentiles and the Jews on 
Itself, as in a comer, in the same fabric and house of the Church. 
So S. Augustine, S. Basil, Euthymius, Cassiodorus, Abulensis, Jansen, 
Maldonatus, and the rest of the Fathers and expositors, either here, 
or on Psalm cxviii. 22. Also S. Peter (Epist. 1, cap . ii. 6), where I 
have expounded the passage at length. For frequently in Scripture 
the fabric of the Church is compared to the building of a house, 
which is laid upon a solid foundation, such as a rock ; for thus the 
Church is built upon, and rests upon, Christ. Christ, therefore, is 
the first rock of the Church, who communicated this name (together 
with the thing itself) to S. Peter — that after Christ he should be the 
rock of the Church — and then to the rest of the Apostles, whom in 
like manner He constituted the foundations of the Church, as is 
plain from the Apocalypse xxi. 19, Ephesians ii. 20, and elsewhere. 
Moreover, Calvin arrogantly, as well as foolishly and impiously, 

VOL. 11. F F 


Digitized by Google 



434 


«. MATTHEW, XXI. 


declares himself to be this stone ; forasmuch as, being rejected by 
the Pope and the Roman Church, he became the foundation of the 
Calvinistic sect Thus does that proud braggart dare to equal him- 
self to Christ, yea, to rob Christ of His oracle and title. But let 
him give the signs by which he may show that he has been sent by 
God : let him show, I say, miracles, prophecies, Scriptures, as Christ 
did. But he never has shown them, and he never will Therefore 
he is not the reformer of the Church, but the deformer. 

Verse 43. Therefore say l unto you. The kingdom of God shall be 
taken from you 9 and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits 
thereof The Church is constantly called the kingdom of God in the 
gospel, because in it God reigns in the faithful by faith and grace, 
and leads them to the heavenly kingdom, that He may reign in 
them by glory. 

Behold there is here, as it were, the epimythion, or post parable 
and application, in which Christ clearly expounds and applies the 
three parables which He has spoken — namely, the first, concerning 
the two sons , one obedient, the other disobedient ; the second, con- 
cerning the vineyard , whose husbandmen killed the servants and the 
Son of the owner ; the third, concerning the rejected stq/te y which was 
made the head of the comer — to the Scribes themselves, and the 
Jews their followers, as follows : “ You, O ye Scribes, are disobedient 
sons to God your Father, for ye persecute Me His Only Begotten 
Son sent by Him. Ye, too, are the husbandmen of the vineyard, 
who will kill Me its Heir. Lastly, ye are the builders of the syna- 
gogue, who reject Me as a stone ; but God will make Me the basis 
and foundation of His Church, because Ha. will take it away from 
you, and transfer it to the Gentiles, who will eagerly receive and 
worship Me, and so will be endowed by Me with grace and glory.” 
For all the parables of Christ have this end in view — that they may 
signify the rejection of the Jews and the election of the Gentiles, 
because the Jews rejected Christ, Whom the Gentiles accepted. By 
this parable Christ so pricked the Scribes, that they prepared the 
cross for Him. 

Verse 44. And whosower shall fall on this stone shall be broken ; 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



ANGER OF THE SCRIBES. 


435 


but on whomsoever it shall fall> it will grind him to powder . The 
Syriac has, shall dissipate him. It means, whoso shall resist Christ 
and persecute Him, as you do, O ye Scribes, shall do it in vain, and 
shall bring hurt to himself both in mind and in Tx)dy : still in such 
sort as that it may, by repentance, be repaired. 

But upon whom it shall fall v this stone. Upon whomsoever Christ 
shall pre$s with the whole weight of His heavy vengeance, as, for 
example upon the damned in the Day of Judgment (as you, O ye 
Scribes will be damned unless ye repent), to such a one there shall 
remain no hope of reparation, or restitution : as if a great stone 
should fall upon a shell, and dash it into minutest fragments, so that 
in no way could it be restored, or repaired. Christ therefore here 
threatens the Scribes with eternal and irreparable destruction, even 
the flames of helL So S. Augustine (lib. i. qucest. Evang. ix. 30), 
Abulensis, Barradi, Jansen, Maldonatus and others. Hear S. 
Augustine, “ They fall upon Him, who only despise Him, or injure 
Him : but He shall fall upon them, when He shall come to judg- 
ment to destroy, that the wicked may be as dust which the wind 
driveth away/ 

Verses 43* 46. And when the chief priests and Pharisees had heard 
His parables , they perceived that He spake of them. But when they 
sought to lay bands on him , they feared the multitude , because they took 
him for a prophet. The Scribes were aware, partly from the actual 
words of the Psalm, partly from the words and gestures of Christ, 
that these things were spoken against them, wherefore they roared, 
and gnashed their teeth at Him; and wished to take Him and 
torment Him, but through fear of the people, they did not dare to do 
so. Behold how by degrees Christ through His reproofs of the 
Scribes prepared for Himself the way to the cross and death. For 
to this after three days He was brought by the Scribes. Thus was 
fulfilled the counsel of God, that He would redeem mankind by the 
death of Christ 

END OF VOLUME II. 


Digitized by v^,ooQle 



JATJ 13 


« 


ALDERMAN LIBRARY 

The return of this book is due on the dste 
indicated below 


DUE 


DUE 






Usually books are lent out for two weeks, but 
there are exceptions and the borrower should 
note carefully the date stamped above. Fines 
are charged for over-due books at the rate of 
five cents a day; for reserved books there are 
special rates and regulations. Books must be 
presented at the desk if renewal is desired. 
L-l 



Digged by 


Google 















