This  is  a reproduction  of  a library  book  that  was  digitized 
by  Google  as  part  of  an  ongoing  effort  to  preserve  the 
information  in  books  and  make  it  universally  accessible. 

Google"  books 

http://books.google.com 


ST.  M.  MAGDALEN’S 
Upper  North  Street,  Brighton. 

Bequeathed  by 

The  Rev.  Frederick  George  Wilderspin 


l913- 


A 


Catholic  Stanbarb  library 

VOLUME  SIX 


THE  GREAT  COMMENTARY 

0F 

CORNELIUS  A LAPIDE 


zed  by  C joogle 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE 


GREAT  COMMENTARY 

OF 

CORNELIUS  A LAPIDE 


TRANSLATED  BY 

THOMAS  W.  MOSSMAN,  B.A., 

RECTOR  OF  TORRINGTON,  LINCOLNSHIRE 

i 

ASSISTED  BY  VARIOUS  SCHOLARS 


-srtON  wn*a  nwpro 


S.  JOHN’S  GOSPEL.  —CHAPS.  XII  TO  XX* 
4 AND  EPISTLES-  I,  II,  AND  III 


FOURTH  EDITION 


EDINBURGH:  JOHN  GRANT 

31  GEORGE  IV.  BRIDGE 


1908 


Digitized  by  GooQle 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE 

HOLY  GOSPEL  OF  JESUS  CHRIST, 

ACCORDING  TO  JOHN. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

I  Jesus  entertained  at  supper  at  Bethany , anointed  by  Mary  Magdalene,  defends 
her  against  the  murmurings  cf  the  Jews . 12  Enters  Jerusalem  riding  upon 

an  ass,  24  In  a parable  He  foretells  His  coming  passion  ; is  glorified  by  a voice 
from  heaven  ; foretells  that  He  would  draw  all  to  Himself  37  Announces 
the  unbelief  of  the  Jews  in  general , though  some  believed  on  Him  secretly, 

THEN  Jesus  six  days  before  the  passover  came  to  Bethany,  where  Lazarus 
was  which  had  been  dead,  whom  he  raised  from  the  dead. 

2  There  they  made  him  a supper ; and  Martha  served : but  Lazarus  was  one  of 
them  that  sat  at  the  table  with  him. 

3  Then  took  Mary  a pound  of  ointment  of  spikenard,  very  costly,  and  anointed 
the  feet  of  Jesus,  and  wiped  his  feet  with  her  hair : and  the  house  was  filled  with 
the  odour  of  the  ointment. 

4  Then  saith  one  of  his  disciples,  Judas  Iscariot,  Simon’s  son , which  should 
betray  him,  ■ * 

5  Why  was  not  this  ointment  sold  for  three  hundred  pence,  and  given  to  the 
poor? 

6  This  he  said,  not  that  he  cared  for  the  poor ; but  because  he  was  a thief, 
tind  had  the  bag,  and  bare  what  was  put  therein. 

7  Then  said  Jesus,  Let  her  alone : against  the  day  of  my  burying  hath  she 
kept  this. 

8  For  the  poor  always  ye  have  with  you  ; but  me  ye  have  not  always. 

9  Much  people  of  the  Jews  therefore  knew  that  he  was  there  : and  they  came 
not  for  Jesus*  sake  only,  but  that  they  might  see  Lazarus  also,  whom  he  had 
raised  from  the  dead.  - 

10  11  But  the  chief  priests  consulted  that  they  might  put  Lazarus  also  to  death  ; 
11  Because  that  by  reason  of  him  many  of  the  Jews  went  away,  and  believed  . 
on  Jesus. 

VOL.  V.  A 


Digitized  by  L.oooLe 


2 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XII. 


12  U On  the  next  day  much  people  that  were  come  to  the  feast,  when  they 
heard  that  Jesus  was  coming  to  Jerusalem, 

13  Took  branches  of  palm  trees,  and  went  forth  to  meet  him,  and  cried, 
Hosanna  : Blessed  is  the  King  of  Israel  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

14  And  Jesus,  when  he  had  found  a young  ass,  sat  thereon  ; as  it  is  written, 

15  Fear  not,  daughter  of  Sion  : behold,  thy  King  cometh,  sitting  on  an  ass’s 
colt 

16  These  things  understood  not  his  disciples  at  the  first : but  when  Jesus  was 
glorified,  then  remembered  they  that  these  things  were  written  of  him,  and  that 
they  had  done  these  things  unto  him. 

17  The  people  therefore  that  was  with  him  when  he  called  Lazarus  out  of  his 
grave,  and  raised  him  from  the  dead,  bare  record. 

18  For  this  cause  the  people  also  met  him,  for  that  they  heard  that  he  had 
done  this  miracle. 

19  The  Pharisees  therefore  said  among  themselves,  Perceive  ye  how  ye  prevail 
nothing  ? behold,  the  world  is  gone  after  him. 

20  T And  there  were  certain  Greeks  among  them  that  came  up  to  worship  at  the 
feast : 

21  The  same  came  therefore  to  Philip,  which  was  of  Bethsaida  of  Galilee,  and 
desired  him,  saying,  Sir,  we  would  see  Jesus. 

22  Philip  cometh  and  telleth  Andrew  : and  again  Andrew  and  Philip  tell 
Jesus. 

23  H And  Jesus  answered  them,  saying,  The  hour  is  come,  that  the  Son  of  man 
should  be  glorified. 

24  Verily,  verily,  I say  unto  you,  Except  a corn  of  wheat  fall  into  the  ground 
and  die,  it  abideth  alone  : but  if  it  die,  it  bringeth  forth  much  fruit. 

25  He  that  loveth  his  life  shall  lose  it ; and  he  that  hateth  his  life  in  this  world 
shall  keep  it  unto  life  eternal. 

26  If  any  man  serve  me,  let  him  follow  me  ; and  where  I am,  there  shall  also 
my  servant  be  : if  any  man  serve  me,  him  will  my  Father  honour. 

27  Now  is  my  soul  troubled ; and  what  shall  I say  ? Father,  save  me  from 
this  hour  : but  for  this  cause  came  I unto  this  hour. 

28  Father,  glorify  thy  name.  Then  came  there  a voice  from  heaven,  saying, 
I have  both  glorified  it,  and  will  glorify  it  again. 

29  The  people  therefore,  that  stood  by,  and  heard  it,  said  that  it  thundered : 
others  said,  An  angel  spake  to  him. 

30  Jesus  answered  and  said,  This  voice  came  not  because  of  me,  but  for  youi 
sakes. 

31  Now  is  the  judgment  of  this  world  : now  shall  the  prince  of  this  world  be 
cast  out 

32  And  I,  if  I be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  men  unto  me. 

33  This  he  said,  signifying  what  death  he  should  die. 

34  The  people  answered  him,  We  have  heard  out  of  the  law  that  Christ  abideth 
for  ever  : and  how  sayest  thou,  The  Son  of  man  must  be  lifted  up?  who  is  this 
Son  of  man  ? 

35  Then  Jesus  said  unto  them,  Yet  a little  while  is  the  light  with  you.  Walk 
while  ye  have  the  light,  lest  darkness  come  upon  you  : for  he  that  walketh  in 
darkness  knoweth  not  whither  he  goeth. 

36  While  ye  have  light,  believe  in  the  light,  that  ye  may  be  the  children  of 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


MEANING  OF  BETHANY.  3 

light.  These  things  spake  Jesus,  and  departed,  and  did  hide  himself  from 
them. 

37  IT  But  though  he  had  done  so  many  miracles  before  them,  yet  they  believed 
not  on  him : 

38  That  the  saying  of  Esaias  the  prophet  might  be  fulfilled,  which  he  spake, 
Lord,  who  hath  believed  our  report?  and  to  whom  hath  the  arm  of  the  Lord 
been  revealed  ? 

39  Therefore  they  could  not  believe,  because  that  Esaias  said  again, 

40  He  hath  blinded  their  eyes,  and  hardened  their  heart ; that  they  should  not 
see  with  their  eyes,  nor  understand  with  their  heart,  and  be  converted,  and  I 
should  heal  them. 

41  These  things  said  Esaias,  when  he  saw  his  glory,  and  spake  of  him. 

42  V Nevertheless  among  the  chief  rulers  also  many  believed  on  him ; but  be- 
cause of  the  Pharisees  they  did  not  confess  him , lest  they  should  be  put  out  of  the 
synagogue  : 

43  For  they  loved  the  praise  of  men  more  than  the  praise  of  God. 

44  If  Jesus  cried  and  said,  He  that  believeth  on  me,  believeth  not  on  me,  but 
on  him  that  sent  me. 

45  And  he  that  seeth  me  seeth  him  that  sent  me. 

46  I am  come  a light  into  the  world,  that  whosoever  believeth  on  me  should 
not  abide  in  darkness. 

47  And  if  any  man  hear  my  words,  and  believe  not,  I judge  him  not : for  I 
came  not  to  judge  the  world,  but  to  save  the  world. 

48  He  that  rejecteth  me,  and  receiveth  not  my  words,  hath  one  that  judgeth 
him  : the  word  that  I have  spoken,  the  same  shall  judge  him  in  the  last  day. 

49  For  I have  not  spoken  of  myself ; but  the  Father  which  sent  me,  he  gave 
me  a commandment,  what  I should  say,  and  what  I should  speak. 

50  And  I know  that  his  commandment  is  life  everlasting  : whatsoever  I speak 
therefore,  even  as  the  Father  said  unto  me,  so  I speak. 

Ver.  1. — Then  Jesus  six  days  before  ihe  Passover , &c.  He  came 
from  Ephraim,  as  the  Passover  was  drawing  on  when  He  was  to 
die.  And  He  came  to  Bethany  to  prepare  Himself  for  it;  nay 
more,  to  offer  Himself  for  death,  and  furnish  an  opportunity  for  it 
through  the  covetousness  of  Judas.  This  explains  why  He  first 
went  to  Bethany.  For  the  chief  priests  had  ordered  that  He  should 
be  seized.  And  He,  knowing  this  by  divine  inspiration,  came  to 
Bethany,  where  He  had  many  well-wishers,  among  whom  He  could 
remain  in  security,  and  might  thence  shortly  afterwards  enter  Jeru- 
salem in  solemn  pomp  on  Palm  Sunday,  as  the  Paschal  Lamb  who 
was  to  be  offered  for  the  sins  of  the  world. 

Bethany,  which  is  close  to  Mount  Olivet,  signifies  in  Hebrew  the 
house  of  obedience.  From  Jhis  place  He  wished  to  go  to  His 
Cross.  For  as  the  Gloss  says,  By  being  obedient  even  as  far  as 


- 


Digitized  by  V joogle 


4 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XII. 


to  the  death  of  the  Cross,  He  taught  His  Church  obedience,  on  the 
Mount  of  Oil,  />.,  the  Mount  of  Mercy,  which  cannot  be  hid,  and 
by  which  He  raises  up  those  who  are  buried  in  grievous  sins.  A 
supper  is  there  made  by  the  faith  and  devotion  of  the  righteous. 
Martha  ministers,  when  each  of  the  faithful  offers  to  the  Lord  works 
of  devotion,  and  Lazarus,  i.e.,  those  who  have  been  raised  up  (from 
sin),  with  those  who  have  remained  stedfast  in  their  righteousness, 
joyfully  feast  on  the  Lord’s  presence. 

Six  days  before  the  Passover . It  was  on  the  Friday  evening  that 
He  came  from  Ephraim.  On  the  following  Sabbath  they  made 
Him  a feast,  and  on  the  next  day  (Palm  Sunday)  He  in  solemn 
manner  entered  Jerusalem.  For  the  Passover  that  year  fell  on  the 
Thursday  of  that  week.  He  came  to  Bethany  on  the  Friday, 
because  it  was  not  lawful  to  journey  on  the  Sabbath. 

Symbolically , The  Gloss  says,  “ God  made  all  things  in  six  days. 
On  the  sixth  He  made  man  ; in  the  sixth  age  of  the  world  He  willed 
to  redeem  him.  He  suffered  on  the  sixth  day  of  the  week,  and  died 
at  the  sixth  hour.” 

Whom  Jesus  raised  from  the  dead \ That  by  His  presence  He 

might  revive  the  memory  of  this  miracle,  and  arouse  the  people 
to  attend  Him  on  His  solemn  entry  into  Jerusalem,  and  shout 
Hosanna. 

Ver.  2. — There  they  made  Him  a supper , &c.  To  show  that  He 
had  really  risen ; as  S.  Augustine  says  (in  loc.)  " He  lived,  He 
talked,  He  partook  of  the  meal : the  truth  was  set  forth,  the 
unbelief  of  the  Jews  was  confounded.” 

Ver.  3.  Mary  (Magdalene)  therefore  (that  she  might  not  be  want- 
ing on  her  part,  and  in  order  specially  to  honour  Christ,  and  to  sur- 
pass all  others  in  her  services,  as  she  surpassed  them  in  love)  took  a 
pound  of  ointment  of  spikenard, \ very  costly . Ointment  of  nard  was 
composed  of  several  sweet  scents  (see  Pliny  H.  N.  xiii.  2),  and 
was  thick.  But  this  was  liquid,  as  S.  Matt.  (xxvi.  7)  says  that  it  was 
poured  on  His  head.  Liquids  are  very  often  weighed  in  vessels, 
or  anyhow  the  nard  itself  from  which  the  ointment  was  made.  Or 
this  pound  was  rather  a measure  of  quantity,  not  of  weight. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


ANOINTING  CHRIST'S  FEET. 


5 


Mystically.  S.  Augustine  says,  “ The  ointment  was  righteousness. 
Therefore  it  was  of  due  weight”  (libra).  The  Gloss  says,  “Mary 
before  anointed  His  feet  as  a penitent ; but  now,  when  the  righteous- 
ness of  the  perfect,  and  not  the  mere  rudiments  of  penitence,  are 
designated,  she  anoints  His  head  and  His  feet.  The  pound  of 
ointment  is  the  perfection  of  righteousness.  He  anoints  the  head, 
who  preaches  high  doctrines  respecting  Christ ; He  anoints  the  feet 
who  respects  the  least  commandments.” 

But  what  is  “pistic  nard”?  (i.)  The  Commentary  on  S. 
Matthew  (in  S.  Jerome)  says  “mystic,”  which  is  absurd.  (2.)  S. 
Augustine  says  it  is  so  called  from  the  place  whence  it  was  brought. 
But  the  place  itself  is  uncertain.  (3.)  Maldonatus  derives  it 
awb  rov  vi Inn,  meaning  that  it  was  liquid,  and  so  could  be  drunk, 
other  ointments  being  thick  and  clotted.  (4.)  Others  derive  it 
from  squeezed  or  pressed  out.  (5.)  As  if  from  wlurig,  pure, 

unadulterated,  as  nard  frequently  was.  (See  Pliny  H.  N.  xii.  13.) 
So  Euthymius,  Theophylact,  on  Mark  xii.,  Baronius,  Ribera,  Jan- 
senius,  Toletus  and  others.  (6.)  Pistici  is  the  same  as  spicati  by 
a change  of  letters.  This  was  the  best  kind  of  ointment.  (This 
point  treated  at  very  great  length.) 

Morally.  Here  learn  that  the  good  works,  with  which  we  anoint 
Christ,  ought  to  be  quite  free  from  fault,  and  of  the  very  best  kind. 
Compare  the  offerings  of  Cain  and  Abel.  (See  Ps.  lxvi.,  xx.  4,  and 
Dan.  iii.  40  (Vulg.),  Lev.  iii.  16,  Num.  xviii.  17,  29,  and  Lev. 
xxiii.  19.) 

And  anointed  the  feet  of  Jesus.  S.  Matt,  adds  “ arid  the  head.” 
Alcuin  explains  mystically,  “The  Head  is  the  loftiness  of  the  God- 
head, the  feet  the  humility  of  the  Incarnation.  Or  the  Head  is 
Christ,  the  feet  the  poor  who  are  His  members.  We  anoint  them 
when  we  give  them  alms.” 

And  wiped  His  feet  with  her  hair.  A hysteron  * froteron.  For 

first  she  wiped,  and  then  anointed  His  feet.  For  had  she  anointed 
His  feet  first,  and  then  wiped  them  with  her  hair,  she  would  have 
anointed  her  own  hair,  (which  she  did  not  wish  to  do,)  and  which 
indeed  she  counted  unworthy  of  such  anointing,  and  not  His  feet 


Digitized  by 


Google 


6 


S.  JOHN,  c.  XII. 


Moreover,  this  sweet-scented  and  precious  ointment  was  not  to  be 
wiped  off,  but  left  on  His  feet,  to  give  them  ease \ 

Her  hair.  To  soil  those  hairs,  of  which  she  used  to  be  vain, 
with  the  dust  of  His  feet,  and  also  that  she  might  with  the  deepest 
reverence  and  humility  place  her  whole  head  beneath  His  feet 
For  S.  Chrysostom  says,  she  placed  the  noblest  part  of  her  body 
beneath  His  feet,  and  she  approached  Him  not  as  man  but  as  God. 

And  the  house  was  filled  with  the  odour  of  the  ointment \ S.  Augus- 
tine says,  mystically,  the  whole  world  was  filled  with  the  good  fame 
of  her  piety  and  virtue.  As  S.  Paul  says,  “ We  are  a sweet  savour  of 
Christ”  (2  Cor.  ii.  14) — to  the  good,  of  life  unto  life;  to  the  wicked, 
of  death  unto  death — as  was  here  the  case.  Whence  it  follows : 

Ver.  4. — Then  said  one  of  His  disciples , Judas  Iscariot , (5.)  Why 
was  not  this  ointment  sold  for  three  hundred  pence , and  given  to 
the  poor  ? SS.  Matt,  and  Mark  add,  “ Why  was  this  waste  of  the 
ointment  made  ? ” Bede  replies,  “ It  was  no  waste,  but  for  the  rite 
of  burial ; nor  is  it  wonderful  that  she  offered  Me  the  sweet  savour 
of  Faith,  when  I am  about  to  shed  my  blood  for  her.” 

Ver.  6. — This  he  said , &c.  Nay  worse,  sacrilegious,  “for  he  seized 
for  his  own  use,  that  which  was  given  for  a sacred  purpose,”  says 
Theophylact.  “ He  carried  the  money  by  his  office,  he  carried  it 
off  by  theft,”  says  S.  Augustine.  He  wished  the  ointment  to  be 
sold,  and  the  price  of  it  given  to  him  ; and  since  he  knew  that  Christ 
did  not  wish  so  large  a sum  to  be  kept  in  his  purse,  but  rather  to 
be  distributed  amongst  the  poor,  he  would  have  distributed  some 
of  it  to  the  poor,  and  have  purloined  the  rest  for  himself.  See  here 
how  opportunity  makes  the  thief,  and  how  dangerous  it  is  for  holy 
men  in  “religion”  to  handle  moneys,  those  especially  which  belong 
to  the  whole  community.  For  if  covetousness  suggests  it,  a portion 
is  easily  diverted  to  the  use  of  themselves  or  their  families. 

But  why  did  Jesus  entrust  to  him  the  bag,  knowing  him  to  be  a 
thief?  I answer,  Because  Judas  was  more  qualified  than  the  other 
Apostles  to  make  purchases.  And  He  allowed  the  theft,  because 
an  opportunity  was  furnished  thereby  for  the  betrayal  and  death 
which  He  courted.  Again  S.  Augustine,  “ Because  the  Church 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BEARING  WITH  THE  WlCKEl). 


1 


would  afterwards  have  its  coffers,  He  admitted  thieves,  in  order  that 
His  Church  might  tolerate  powerful  thieves,  even  when  suffering 
from  them,  to  teach  us  that  the  wicked  must  be  tolerated, Tor  fear 
of  dividing  the  body  of  Christ.  Do  thou,  the  good,  bear  with  the 
evil,  that  thou  mayest  attain  to  the  reward  of  the  good.”  S. 
Chrysostom  adds,  “The  Lord  committed  the  bags  to  a thief;  in 
order  to  cut  off  any  excuse  for  betraying  Him,  and  that  it  might  not 
seem  as  if  he  betrayed  Him  from  want  of  money.”  But  Theophylact 
says,  “ Some  maintain  that  as  the  least  of  the  Apostles  he  undertook 
the  management  of  the  money.” 

Lastly,  S.  Bernard  (de  Consid.  iv.  6)  teaches  us  “that  Christ 
wished  in  ‘ this  ’ way  to  teach  Prelates  readily  to  entrust  the  manage- 
ment of  temporal  affairs  to  any  one,  but  to  reserve  the  ordering  of 
spiritual  matters  to  themselves : though  many  do  exactly  the  con- 
trary.” Again,  Christ  acted  thus,  to  keep  us  from  being  surprised, 
if  in  the  assemblies,  monasteries,  and  congregations  of  holy  men, 
there  be  occasionally  found  some  vicious  and  scandalous  persons ; 
and  accordingly  S.  Augustine  (Epist.  137,  nunc  75),  when  one  of  his 
monks  had  caused  scandal,  at  which  the  people  cried  out  against 
him,  prudently  replied,  “ However  vigilant  may  be  the  discipline  of 
my  house,  I am  but  a man,  I am  living  among  men : nor  do  I dare 
to  claim  for  myself,  that  my  house  should  be  better  than  Noah’s 
ark,  where  among  eight  men  one  was  found  reprobate,  or  better 
than  the  house  of  Abraham,  when  it  was  said,  Cast  out  the  bond- 
woman  and  her  son  ; or  better  than  the  house  of  Isaac,  to  whom  it 
was  said  respecting  the  twin  children,  Jacob  have  I loved,  but  Esau 
have  I hated : or  better  than  the  house  of  Jacob,  when  his  son 
defiled  his  father’s  bed ; or  better  than  the  house  of  David,  whose 
son  lay  with  his  sister,  and  where  another  son  rebelled  against  his 
holy  and  gentle  father;  or  better  than  they  who  were  associated 
with  the  Lord  Christ  Himself,  where  eleven  righteous  men  tolerated 
Judas,  that  perfidious  thief;  or,  lastly,  better  than  heaven  from  which 
the  angels  fell.” 

Doubtless  God  permits  it  in  His  wise  providence,  in  order  that 
by  the  wickedness  of  one  or  two  the  goodness  and  sanctity  of  others 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


8 


S.  JOHN,  c.  XII. 


may  shine  out  the  more  by  way  of  contrast,  as  light  amid  darkness, 
gold  amongst  lead,  the  sun  between  the  clouds,  a wise  man* among 
fools,  shines  forth  only  the’  more  resplendently.  For  contraries 
opposed  to  each  other  are  the  more  marked.  (See  Ecclus . xxxiii.  15, 
and  notes  fit  loc.) 

And  had  the  bag \ &c.  From  this  Jansen  and  others  rightly 
gather  that  it  is  lawful  for  the  Church  to  have  coffers  and  wealth, 
and  that  it  does  not  derogate  from  perfection  to  have  a common 
purse,  for  reasonable  and  moderate  expenses.  For  Jesus  did  nothing 
which  implied  imperfection,  being  the  teacher  of  all  perfection. 

In  order  to  understand  this*  thoroughly,  observe  that  though 
Christ,  by  reason  of  His  Hypostatic  Union  with  the  Word,  had  a 
pre-eminent  and  (as  it  were)  Divine  dominion  over  all  creatures, 
yet  professed  poverty,  that  is,  an  abandonment  of  ownership,  special 
ownership,  in  order  to  be  the  teacher  and  example  of  a more 
perfect  life.  See  Matt.  viii.  20,  xix.  21,*  2 7. 

Observe,  secondly,  that  Christ  had  absolute  control  of  the  offerings 
made  to  Him  by  the  faithful,  for  the  common  good,  and  not  for  His 
special  use.  They  belonged  to  the  whole  College  of  the  Apostles. 
He  held  them  not  as  though  He  were  their  sole  owner.  See 
John  iv.  8,  vi.  5. 

It  follows  therefore  that  it  does  not  in  any  way  detract  from  their 
perfection  for  Religious  orders  to  have  goods  in  common.  (See 
John  xxii.  Extravag.  Ad  Conditorem.)  In  some  cases  this  is  the 
most  perfect  way,  in  others  not.  But  Christ  at  one  time  seemed 
to  have  lost  all  claim  even  to  a share  of  the  common  property.  (See 
Luke  viii.  3.)  This  seems  to  be  all  that  Nicholas  IV.  means. 
(Can.  Exiit  qui  seminat.  De  Verb.  Signif.  in  vi,  though  he 
apparently  contradicts  John  xxii.) 

S.  Thomas  (see  Secund.  Quasi,  clxxxviii.  Art.  7)  proves  d priori 
that  the  possession  of  goods  in  common  does  not  hinder  perfection. 
Poverty,  he  says,  is  only  an  instrument  of  perfection,  as  taking 
away  anxiety  in  acquiring  and  preserving  riches,  the  love  of  them, 
and  our  priding  ourselves  in  them.  But  to  have  goods  in  common 
does  not  give  rise  to  any  of  these  evils ; and  so  far  from  hindering 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


GOODS  IN  COMMON. 


9 


charity,  it  even  promotes  it.  “ For  it  is  manifest,”  says  S.  Thomas, 
“ that  to  store  up  things  which  are  necessary  to  man,  and  purchased 
at  a fitting  time,  causes  the  least  possibly  anxiety.” 

All  founders  of  Religious  Orders  have  sanctioned  this.  And 
hence  resulted  the  Constitution  of  Justinian,  that  the  goodS  of  those 
who  became  monks  should  belong  as  a matter  of  course  to  their 
monasteries.  For  the  whole  meaning  of  poverty  turns  on  hot 
having  anything  belonging  especially  to  one's  own  self,  though  there 
may  be  some  common  fund,  from  which*  according  to  the  Apostolic 
Rule,  distribution  should  be  made  to  each,  as  need  may  require. 
(See  Acts  ii.  44-45,  35>  an(^  Nftes  thereon .)  This  is  just  what 

S.  Jerome  says  to  the  “ Religious  ” of  his  own  day  (Epist.  xxii.) 
“ No  one  has  any  right  so  say,  I have  not  a tunic,  or  a coat,  or  a 
bed  pf  plaited  bulrushes.  For  the  head  of  the  Community  so 
divides  the  common  stock,  that  every  one  has  what  he  asks  for. 
And  if  any  begins  to  fall  ill,  he  is  transferred  to  a larger  cell,  and  is 
so  carefully  attended  by  the  older  monks,  that  he  longs  not  for  the 
delights  of  cities,  or  the  tenderness  of  a mother.” 

The  fathers  and  schoolmen  teach  everywhere  the  same  thing. 
(See  Suarez  par.  iil  Qusest  xl  disp.  xxviii.  § 2,  Bellarm,  de  Summo 
Pont  iv.  14,  Soto  de  Just.  iv.  Qusest.  i.  art  1.) 

Nicolas  IV.  ( ut  supr.)  says  that  to  have  common  purses  is  to 
detract  from  perfection,  for  Christ  in  this  matter  adapted  Himself  to 
the  weaker  brethren,  that  He  might  be  an  example  to  all.  Suarez 
replies,  that  Nicolas  only  asserted  that  in  the  matter  of  poverty  that 
was  the  least  rigid  rule  which  allowed  them  to  have  common  purses, 
but  that  it  must  not  be  concluded  from  this  that  the  other  rule  was 
absolutely  the  most  perfect.  For  though  less  perfect,  as  common 
poverty,  it  may  be  more  perfect  in  charity,  or  some  other  virtue. 
For  Nicolas  is  speaking  of  the  Franciscans  (of  whom  he  was  one), 
whose  Order  had  for  its  scope  and  end  the  extremest  poverty,  in 
order  to  be  conformed  to  S.  Francis.  But  other  orders  have  other 
pious  and  holy  ends,  for  which  it  is  more  convenient  to  have  goods 
in  common.  And  therefore  this  is ‘more  fitting  and  perfect  in  their 
case.  Carthusians  observe  silence  and  solitude.  Others  practise 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


10 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XII. 


great  austerity.  But  those  who  are  employed  in  preaching  and 
missions  to  unbelievers,  need  great  strength  to  endure  the  great 
labours  of  their  order,  and  make  up  for  austerity  of  living  by  charity 
towards  their  neighbours.  Both  act  in  a manner  suited  to  their 
order,  and  the  end  they  propose  to  themselves.  Different  ends  re- 
quire different  means.  The  Council  of  Trent  allows  all  " Religious,” 
except  the  Franciscans,  to  own  Real  Property  (dona  immobilia ). 

Ver.  7. — Then  said  Jesus , Suffer  her  to  keep  this  for  the  day  of 
my  burial.  In  the  Greek  it  is  “ for  the  day  of  my  burial  hath  she 
kept  this,”  and  also  in  the  Syriac  (see  notes  on  Matt.  xxvi.  12,  &c.) 
Hear  S.  Augustine,  “ He  saith  not  to  him,  It  is  on  account  of  thy 
thefts  that  thou  speakest  thus.  He  knew  he  was  a thief,  but  was 
unwilling  to  expose  him.  He  chose  rather  to  bear  with  him,  and 
to  set  us  an  example  of  patience  in  tolerating  evil  men  in  the 
Church.” 

Ver.  9. — Much  people  of  the  Jews , &c.  " Curiosity  led  them,” 

says  S.  Augustine,  “ not  charity,”  to  see  and  hear  Lazarus,  and  to 
ask  him  where  he  had  been  after  death,  what  he  had  seen,  what  he 
had  done?  So  Cyril,  Theophylact,  Leontius. 

Ver.  10. — But  the  chief  priests  thought  (sfiov'kiuaotvro  consulted)  that 
they  might  put  Lazarus  also  to  death . See  here  their  virulent  envy 
and  malice : envying  Jesus  His  glory.  They  grudge  also  Lazarus 
his  life,  lest  it  should  add  to  the  glory  of  Jesus.  For  the  feast  of  the 
Passover  was  at  hand,  at  which  all  the  Jews  who  flocked  together  would 
see  Lazarus,  and  wondering  at  the  power  of  Jesus  who  had  raised 
him  from  the  dead,  would  consequently  believe  on  Him.  And  in 
order  to  prevent  this,  they  determine  to  put  him  out  of  the  way. 
But  S.  Augustine  (in  loc .)  rightly  exclaims  against  them,  “ O foolish 
thought,  and  blind  cruelty!  For  could  not  the  Lord,  who  had 
power  to  raise  him  from  the  dead,  have  power  to  raise  him  up  also 
if  he  had  been  put  to  death  ? In  putting  him  to  death,  could  ye 
take  away  Christ's  power  ? If  a dead  man  seems  to  you  one  thing, 
and  one  who  is  put  to  death  another,  behold  the  Lord  did  both,  for 
He  both  raised  Lazarus  who  was  dead,  and  Himself  also  who  had 
been  put  to  death.” 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


MANY  JEWS  BELIEVE. 


II 


Lastly,  the  raising  of  Lazarus  was  especially  the  work  of  God, 
and  they  therefore  who  were  so  eager  to  put  him  to  death,  were 
fighting  against  God,  and  challenging  Him,  as  it  were,  to  the 
contest. 

Ver.  ii. — Because  that  by  reason  of  him  many  of  the  Jews  went 
away,  and  believed  on  Jesus — vnfjyov,  withdrew  themselves,  deserted 
their  party.  This  may  mean  either,  “many  of  the  Jews  went  their 
way,”  or  else  “many  went  away  from  the  unbelieving  Jews,  and 
followed  Christ” 

Ver.  12 .—But  on  the  next  day , i.e.  on  Palm  Sunday,  five  days 
before  the  Passover ; the  tenth  day  of  the  month  Nizan,  on  which 
day  the  Lamb  (the  type  of  Christ)  was  to  be  killed,  and  on  the 
fourteenth  to  be  brought  to  Jerusalem.  (Exod.  xii.  3.)  See  notes 
to  Matt.  xxi.  7. 

Ver.  17. — The  people  therefore  . . . bare  witness , &c.,  to  the 
raising  of  Lazarus. 

Ver.  18. — For  this  cause  the  people  also  met  Him , for  that  they 
had  heard  that  He  had  done  this  miracle.  The  people  who  were 
present  at  the  raising  of  Lazarus  spread  abroad  the  miracle, 
affirming  that  they  had  seen  it.  And  the  strangeness  of  it  so 
excited  the  people  that  they  ran  in  crowds  to  meet  Jesus,  and  to 
hail  Him  as  the  Messiah. 

Ver.  19. — The  Pharisees  therefore  said  among  themselves,  Perceive 
ye  how  that  ye  prevail  nothing  1 Behold,  the  world  is  gone  after  Him . 
This  is  an  hyperbole.  But  a large  body,  of  every  age,  sex,  and 
rank  had  gone  after  Him,  old  and  young,  Jews  and  Gentiles.  S. 
Cyril  observes  that  the  Pharisees  tacitly  prophesied  that  all  the  world 
would  be  converted  to  Christ,  though  they  themselves  did  not 
understand  this. 

S.  Chrysostom  and  Theophylact  consider  that  they  who  spoke 
thus  were  believers  in  Christ,  or  anyhow  disposed  to  believe  in  Him, 
and  that  they  addressed  in  these  words  those  who  disbelieved  in 
Him. 

But  S.  Cyril,  Euthymius,  and  others,  think  that  they  were  un- 
believers, and  enemies  of  Christ,  explaining  it  thus : — We  have  all 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


12 


S.  JOHN,  C.  Xtl. 


of  us  decided  to  put  Jesus  to  death.  Why  do  we  delay  ? We  have 
gained  nothing  by  it  It  would  have  been  far  better,  if  we  had  put 
Him  to  death  at  once,  before  His  party  had  increased,  and  become 
so  well  known.  What  now  is  our  course  of  duty  ? To  carry  out  our 
intention  as  quickly  as  possible.  Why  do  we  delay?  If  we  delay 
much  longer  all  will  go  after  Him.  We  shall  be  beaten  by  numbers, 
unless  we  prevail  by  craft. 

Ver.  20. — And  there  were  certain  Greeks , &c.  Some  strangely 
suppose  these  to  have  been  Jews  who  lived  among  the  Gentiles, 
when  S.  John  expressly  says  that  they  were  Gentiles.  These  were 
partly  proselytes,  who  had  already  embraced  Judaism,  or  at  least 
were  thinking  about  it  (so  Chrysostom,  Theophylact,  and  Euthymius), 
and  partly  Gentiles,  who  believed  that  there  was  One  God,  and  who 
on  seeing  Him  worshipped  so  reverently  in  the  Temple,  and  by 
such  multitudes  at  the  Passover,  resolved  to  do  the  same,  being 
specially  attracted  by  the  fame  of  Christ's  holiness  and  miracles, 
and  being  desirous  of  seeing  Him.  So  S.  Cyril,  Leontius,  and 
Theophylact.  Just  as  the  Eunuch  of  Queen  Candace  went  up  to 
Jerusalem  to  worship  (Acts  viii.  27);  and  Gentile  kings  also 
reverenced  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem  and  sent  offerings  to  it,  as  Cyrus, 
Darius  Hystaspes  (Ezra  i.  and  vi),  Seleucus,  and  other  kings  of 
Asia  (2  Macc.  iii.  3). 

Ver.  21. — The  same  came  therefore  to  Philip  (the  Apostle),  who 
was  of  Bethsaida , &c.  They  went  to  Philip,  in  preference  to  the 
other  Apostles,  either  because  he  was  known  to  them,  or  was  the 
first  they  met,  or  because  in  his  voice  and  bearing  he  exhibited 
greater  affability  and  candour,  which  attracted  all  men  to  him. 
For  they  did  not  venture  as  Gentiles  to  approach  Jesus  Himself,  a 
person  of  such  great  holiness,  and  a Prophet,  and  moreover  a Jew, 
say  S.  Cyril,  Chrysostom,  and  Leontius.  They  request  Philip  there- 
fore to  mediate  in  their  behalf. 

Ver.  22. — Philip  cometh  and  telleth  Andrew  (as  the  greater  and 
elder  Apostle) , and  again  Andrew  and  Philip  tell  Jesus . Andrew  had 
the  greater  authority  with  Jesus,  as  having  been  the  first  called,  and 
as  having  brought  to  Him  his  brother  Peter.  Having  consulted 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  CORN  OF  WHEAT. 


13 


together,  they  mention  the  whole  matter  to  Jesus  before  introducing 
the  Gentiles  : for  they  had  heard  Jesus  say,  “ Go  not  into  the  way  of 
the  Gentiles  ” (Matt.  x.  5). 

Ver.  23. — But  Jesus  answered  them, , &c.  Do  not  drive  away  the 
Gentiles  from  me,  but  bring  them  to  me.  What  I said  before  was 
at  the  beginning  of  my  preaching,  which  was  intended  for  the  Jews 
only ; but  now,  when  my  preaching  as  well  as  my  life  is  coming  to 
an  end,  and  the  Jews  reject  my  preaching,  I will  pass  over  to  the 
Gentiles.  For  the  hour  is  coming,  when  I shall  be  glorified,  not 
only  by  the  Jews,  but  also  by  the  Gentiles,  throughout  the  whole 
world;  I shall  be  acknowledged,  that  is,  as  the  Messiah  and  the 
Saviour,  and  worshipped  and  adored  by  means  of  your  preaching  in 
every  place. 

Moreover,  the  glorification  of  Christ  is  the  glorification  of  all 
Christians.  For  S.  Augustine  says  {Serm.  clxxvi  de  temp.) — The 
Death  of  Christ  hath  quickened  us ; His  Resurrection  hath  raised 
us  up ; His  Ascension  hath  dedicated  us ; and  {Serm.  clxxxiv.)  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  ascends,  the  Holy  Spirit  descends  [ Both  these , not 
S.  Augustine]. 

Ver.  24. — Verily , verily,  I say  unto  you , Except  a com  of  wheat,  &c. 
Christ  teaches  us  that  His  glorification  would  come  to  Him  through 
the  death  of  the  Cross,  lest  the  Apostles  and  the  faithful  should  be 
offended  at  it.  Hear  S.  Augustine  {in  loc.),  “ Jesus  by  this  meant 
Himself.  For  He  was  the  grain  of  wheat  which  had  to  die,  and  be 
multiplied ; to  die  through  the  unbelief  of  the  Jews,  to  be  multiplied 
by  the  faith  of  all  people.”  This  means,  that  as  a grain  of  wheat 
thrown  into  the  ground  does  not  germinate  except  it  die,  but  if  it 
die  it  germinates  and  brings  forth  much  fruit ; so,  in  like  manner, 
I must  needs  die,  that  by  the  merits  and  through  the  example  of  my 
death,  I may  bring  forth  many  eminent  and  striking  fruits  of  virtue 
and  faith : I mean  the  many  thousands  of  Martyrs,  Virgins,  Doctors, 
and  Confessors,  all  over  the  world  in  the  present  and  future  ages. 
This  also  comes  to  pass  in  the  death  of  Martyrs,  when  one  dies* 
and  many  spring  up  in  his  place,  and  embrace  the  faith  of  Christ 
The  Church  reads  this  passage  on  the  Feast  of  S.  Lawrence,  and 


Digitized  by  ' 


3gle 


*4 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XII. 


other  Martyrs.  Tertullian  truly  says  (in  fin . Apol. ),  “The  Blood 
of  the  Martyrs  is  the  seed  of  the  Church,”  and  adds,  “ Torture  us, 
rack  us,  condemn  us,  crush  us : your  iniquity  is  the  proof  of 
our  innocence.”  And  again,  “ The  more  exquisite  your  cruelty,  the 
more  does  it  attract  to  our  sect ; we  increase  in  number  the  oftener 
you  mow  us  down.”  S.  Gregory  (Dialog,  lib . Hi.  cap . 39)  gives  a 
remarkable  instance  in  S.  Hermengild.  He  was  killed  by  his  father 
Leovigild,  an  Arian  king,  and  thus  won  the  king  himself  and  his 
brother  Recared,  and  the  whole  nation  of  the  Visigoths,  to  the 
orthodox  faith.  “One,  then,”  says  S.  Gregory,  “died  in  that  nation, 
that  many  might  live ; and  while  one  grain  fell  to  the  ground  in  faith , 
to  win  the  faith  of  souls,  an  abundant  harvest  sprang  up.” 

Anagogically . Bede  says,  “Jesus  was  sown  of  the  seed  of  the 
Patriarchs,  on  the  field  of  this  world,  that  is,  He  was  incarnate  : He 
died  Himself  alone,  He  arose  in  company  with  many.”  Hear  S. 
Bernard  (Serm.  xv.  in  Cant.),  “ Let  the  grain  die ; let  the  harvest 
of  the  Gentiles  spring  up.  It  was  needful  that  Christ  should  suffer, 
and  rise  from  the  dead,  and  that  repentance  and  remission  of  sins 
should  be  preached  in  His  Name,  not  to  Judea  only,  but  to  all 
nations ; to  the  end  that  from  that  one  Name  of  Christ  thousands  of 
thousands  should  be  called  Christians,  and  say  ‘Thy  Name  is  as 
ointment  poured  forth (Cant.  i.  3). 

Ver.  25. — He  that  loveth  his  life,  &c.  He  that  so  preferreth  his 
life  to  my  Faith  and  its  profession,  as  rather  to  deny  the  Faith  than 
lose  his  life,  shall  incur  eternal  death.  But  he  who  hateth  his  life, 
so  as  to  prefer  losing  it  to  losing  the  Faith,  will  live  in  eternal 
happiness  in  heaven.  Again,  the  same  is  true  of  those  who  prefer 
their  own  evil  desires  to  my  Law : and  of  those  who  hate  their  life 
by  resisting  its  desires  which  are  contrary  to  God’s  Law,  and  thus 
keep  it  unto  life  eternal  Such  as  Martyrs,  Anchorites,  “ Religious,” 
and  all  other  holy  people.  Either  meaning  is  suitable,  and  was 
intended  by  Christ.  Both  meanings  are  conjoined  by  SS.  Chrysostom, 
Theophylact,  and  Euthymius.  For  Christ  foresaw  that  the  Apostles, 
and  Christians  in  general,  would  after  His  death  suffer  persecution, 
and  accordingly  He  here  wished  to  forewarn  and  forearm  them. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


HATING  ONE'S  LIFE. 


15 

Again,  Christ  wished  to  teach  all  Christians,  that  they  should 
constantly  resist  all  evil  desires  and  strive  against  them.  (See  Gal. 
v.  17 ; Matt.  x.  39,  xvi.  25  ; Ecclus.  xviii.  30.  See  notes  on  this  last 
passage.) 

But  the  Circumcelliones  misinterpreted  this  passage,  for,  as  S. 
Augustine  testifies  (in  loo.),  they  used  to  kill  themselves  in  order 
to  obtain  the  eternal  life  here  promised  by  Christ.  For  it  is  one 
thing  to  hate  one’s  life,  and  another  to  make  away  with  it,  an  act 
forbidden  by  every  law. 

Lastly,  hear  S.  Augustine  (in  loc.),  “ He  that  loveth  his  life  shall 
lose  it  Which  can  be  understood  in  two  ways.  He  who  loves 
will  lose  ; *'&,  if  thou  lovest,  thou  wilt  lose  : if  thou  wishest  to  have 
life  in  Christ,  fear  not  to  die  for  Christ.  Or,  in  the  other  sense,  love 
not  thy  life,  lest  thou  lose  it, — love  it  not  in  this  life,  lest  thou  lose 
it  in  life  eternal.  This  latter  meaning  more  accords  with  the  mind 
of  the  Gospel.”  And  a few  sentences  sffter,  “ A great  and  marvellous 
saying,  that  a man  should  so  love  his  life  as  to  lose  it,  and  so  hate 
it  as  not  to  lose  it  If  thou  hast  loved  it  ill,  then  dost  thou  hate  it ; 
if  thou  hast  hated  it  rightly,  then  hast  thou  loved  it  Happy  they 
who  hate  their  souls  and  keep  them,  that  they  lose  them  not  by 
loving  them.”  And  then  he  concludes,  “When  therefore  it  comes 
to  the  point,  that  we  must  either  do  contrary  to  the  commandment 
of  God,  or  else  depart  this  life,  and  a man  is  obliged  to  choose 
either  the  one  or  the  other,  when  the  persecutor  threatens  his  death, 
let  him  rather  choose  to  die  through  loving  God,  than  to  die  through 
offending  Him.  Let  him  hate  his  life  in  this  world,  that  he  may 
keep  it  unto  life  eternal.”  Hear  S.  Chrysostom,  “ He  loves  his  life 
in  this  world,  who  obeys  its  unseemly  desires.  He  hates  it,  who 
yields  not  to  its  hurtful  desires.  He  says  ‘hate’  because  as  we 
cannot  bear  to  hear  the  voice  of  those  we  hate,  so  should  a soul 
resolutely  turn  away  from  one  who  wishes  what  is  contrary  to  God.” 
And  Theophylact  adds  (by  way  of  consolation,  and  as  knowing  how 
grievous  it  is  to  hate  one’s  soul),  “ In  this  world?  indicating  the 
shortness  of  the  time,  and  speaking  of  the  eternal  reward.  S.  Chry- 
sostom adds,  “ that  Christ,  when  He  saw  that  His  disciples  would 


Digitized  by 


Google 


i6 


- S.  JOHN,  C.  XII. 


be  saddened  at  his.  death,  raised  up  their  thoughts  to  higher  things, 
as  if  He  said — If  ye  will  not  bear  my  death  manfully,  no  benefit 
will  accrue  to  you  unless -ye  die  yourselves.  These  words  of  Christ 
are  an  axiom,  and  a summary  of  a Christian’s  life.  It  is  the  root  and 
foundation  of  all  virtues,  which  are  deduced  from  it,  as  conclusions 
from  their  premisses.  He  therefore  who  wishes  to  become  specially 
learned  and  perfect  in  the  school  of  Christ,  should  constantly  rumi- 
nate on  this  saying,  weigh  it,  impress  it  on  his  will  and  carry  it  out 
in  act,  try  all  his  actions  by  it  as  a touchstone,  adapt  and  conform 
himself  to  it.  For  thus  will  he  become  a pre-eminently  true  disciple 
and  follower  of  Christ,  and  in  return  for  this  brief  life  which  he 
counts  but  nought,  will  obtain  the  joys  of  life  eternal 

Ver.  26. — If  any  man  love  Me,  let  him  follow  Me . “ Let  him 

imitate  Me  by  death  and  mortification,  and  by  good  works,”  says 
& Chrysostom,  “ walk  in  my  ways,  and  not  his  own,  and  not  seeking 
his  own,  but  the  things  which  are  Jesus  Christ’s  (Phil,  ii  21)  ; and 
* whatever  good  he  does,  either  in  temporal  or  spiritual  things,  doing 
it  for  Him.” 

And  where  I am,  there  shall  my  servant  be.  “ Behold  the  fruit  and 
the  reward,”  S.  Augustine  proceeds ; “ He  is  loved  freely,  and  the 
reward  of  His  ministration  is  to  be  with  Him,  to  be  adopted  by  Him 
to  whom  he  is  united,  in  heaven,  i.e.  in  the  vision  and  possession 
of  God,  in  happiness  and  joy  eternaL”  So  S.  Chrysostom.  See  notes 
on  Luke  xxii  7. 

If  any  man  serve  Me,  him  will  my  Father  honour,  with  heavenly 
honour,  before  the  angels  and  the  whole  world.  He  says  not,  “ I 
will  honour  him,  for  they  had  not  yet  attained  a right  knowledge  of 
Him,  but  thought  more  of  the  Father,”  says  S.  Chrysostom. 

Ver.  27, — Now  is  my  soul  troubled.  Because  He  had  mentioned 
His  approaching  death,  He  allowed  the  natural  dread  of  it  to  be 
aroused  in  His  mind  (as  is  the  case  with  ourselves),  and  so  was 
troubled.  “Father,”  He  said,  “save  Me  from  this  hour.”  Just  as 
in  the  garden  he  prayed,  “ Let  this  cup  pass  from  Me.” 

(1.)  S.  Chrysostom  gives  the  reason,  “Having  exhorted  His 
disciples  to  follow  Him  even  to  death,  for  fear  they  should  say  that 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


CHRIST  SHRUNK  FROM  DE^TH.  1/ 

He  could  easily  philosophise  about  death,  He  showed  that  He  was 
in  an  agony,  and  yet  that  He  did  not  refuse  to  die,  to  teach  us  to 
do  the  same,  when  dreading  death  and  selfkienial. 

(2.)  S.  Cyril  says,  He  did  it  to  show  that  He  was  not  only  God, 
but  true  man,  subject  to  all  our  passions  and  sorrows. 

(3.)  S.  Augustine,  and  after  him  Bede,  “ that  Christ  by  taking  on 
Him  our  infirmities  might  heal  and  strengthen  us.  Thou  tellest  my 
soul  to  follow  Thee.  But  I see  that  thy  soul  is  troubled.  What 
foundation  shall  I seek,  if  the  Rock r gives  way?  But  I recognise 
thy  compassion  therein.  * For  by  being  thus  troubled  by  thy 
voluntary  act  of  love,’  Thou  comfortest  the  weak,  lest  they  should 
perish  through  despain  Our  Head  took  on  Himself  the  feelings  of 

His  members.”  And  again,  “As  He  has  raised  us  up  to  things 

¥ 

which  are  highest,  so  does  He  feel  sympathy  for  us  in  those  which 

are  lowest”  And  he  brings  in  Christ  as  thus  speaking,  “Thou  hast 

* 

heard  my  mighty  voice  addressed  to  thee/  Thou  -hast  heard  in  Me  , 
the  voice  of  thine  own  weakness : I give  thee  strength  that  thou 
mayest  run  ; I check  not  thy  speed,  but  I take  upon  Myself  thy 
fear,  and  make  a way  for  thee  to  pass  over.” 

And  what  shall  1 say  9 Father , save  Me  from  this  hour  Theo- 
phylact  and  Leontius  explain  thus  : “I  know  not  what  to  do  or  say. 
Shall  I say  then,  Father,  save  Me  from  this  hour  ? Shall  I shrink 
from  death?  By  no  means,  I will  master  my  agony,  I will  go 
willingly  to  meet  my  death.” 

Others  express  it  more  simply  and  plainly,  as  expressing  His 
natural  dread  of  death,  corrected  at  once  by  the  exercise  of  His 
superior  will  As  in  the  Agony  in  the*  garden.  For  He  imme- 
diately adds, 

Yet  for  this  cause  have  I come  to  this  hour . Though  I naturally 
dread  death,  yet  I do  not  wish  this  natural  desire  of  Mine  to  be 
fulfilled.  For  I came  into  the  world  for  the  very  purpose  of  drink- 
ing this  cup  of  the  Passion.  So  S.  Augustine,  Bede,  Rupertus, 
and  others. 

Ver.  28. — Father \ glorify  thy  Name . That  in  My  death,  which  I 

willingly  undertake,  I may  glorify  thy  Name,  by  the  entire 
VOL.  V.  B 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XII. 


I* 

obedience  and  devotion  with  which  I will  offer  myself  as  a Victim 
for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world,  thus  restoring  to  the  life  of  grace 
men  who  were  lost  in  sin,  reconciling  them  to  Thee,  and  taking 
them  to  heaven  to  glorify  Thee  for  ever.  So  S.  Augustine,  Chrysostom, 
Euthymius.  It  was  said  in  like  manner  to  S.  Peter,  that  He  would 
by  His  death  glorify  God  (John  xxi.  19).  Hear  S.  Augustine:  “Glorify 
Me  by  my  Passion  and  Resurrection.”  And  S.  Chrysostom:  “His 
dying  for  the  truth  He  calls  ‘ the  glory  of  God:*  for  after  His  death 
the  Name  of  God  would  be  acknowledged  by  the  world.”  And  the 
gloss,  “ I seek  salvation,  but  I refuse  not  to  suffer,  and  for  the  sake 
of  this  passion  glorify  Me,  for  that  is  the  glory  of  thy  Name.” 

Ver.  2. — Glorify  Me  at  this  very  instant ; that  both  Gentiles  and 
Jews  may  acknowledge  that  I have  been  sent  by  Thee  to  redeem 
man,  and  will  therefore  glorify  Thee  for  thy  goodness.  So  Theodore 
of  Heraclaea. 

Then  came  there  a voice , &c.  I have  glorified  It — (1)  By  com- 
municating to  Him,  as  my  only  begotten  Son,  my  majesty,  glory, 
and  Godhead  from  all  eternity.  As  He  said  chap.  xvii.  5.  So  S. 
Augustine  and  Bede. 

(2.)  In  creating  the  world,  and  all  things  therein  by  Him.  So 
Rupertus. 

(3.)  Most  sensibly.  By  the  voice  from  heaven  at  His  Baptism, 
and  by  the  miracles  and  mighty  works  which  He  wrought.  And 
also  by  the  voice  at  this  time  uttered  from  heaven.  He  glorified 
Him  also  by  His  death  and  resurrection,  His  ascension,  His 
sending  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  the  preaching  of  the  Apostles,  and  the 
miracles,  which  will  lead  all  nations  to  acknowledge,  worship,  love 
and  adore  Him  as  the  Son  of  God.  So  S.  Chrysostom,  Cyril,  and 
others. 

Ver.  29. — The  people  therefore  that  stood  by , and  heard  it  (this 
trumpet  voice  of  God  the  Father)  said  that  it  thundered.  Because 
it  was  very  loud  and  resonant.  Or  perhaps  because  it  was  not 
articulate,  but  like  the  confused  sound  of  thunder.  S.  Chrysostom 
says,  “ The  voice  was  clear  and  significant  enough,  but  they  being 
dull  and  carnal,  it  soon  passed  away,  and  they  retained  merely  the 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


god’s  voice. 


!9 


sound  of  it”  And  further  on,  “ They  knew  it  was  articulate,  but 
did  not  take  in  its  meaning.”  But  the  truer  meaning,  Rupertus, 
and  after  him  Maldonatus,  say  is  this,  “ That  they  all  heard  this 
articulate  voice  and  understood  its  meaning,  viz.,  that  Jesus  was 
the  Son  of  God ; but  that  on  account  of  the  loudness  of  the  voice 
they  could  not  persuade  themselves  it  was  really  a voice,  but  that 
either  it  was  thunder,  and  that  they  were  mistaken  in  supposing 
they  had  heard  an  articulate  voice  as  of  a man,  or  that  it  was 
certainly  the  voice  of  an  angel.”  They  thought  also  that  the 
Evangelist  mentioned  this,  in  order  to  show  that  it  was  not  a low 
or  indistinct  voice,  such  as  Christ  only  could  hear,  and  that  there 
were  no  other  witnesses,  but  that  it  was  so  loud  and  so  clear  that 
they  not  only  all  heard  it,  but  heard  it  so  plainly  that  some 
thought  it  was  thunder,  some  the  voice  of  an  angel,  while  none 
considered  it  to  be  the  voice  of  a man.  And  this  consequently 
proved  that  what  they  considered  thunder  was  in  truth  the  voice 
of  God,  for  thunder  is  commonly  spoken  of  as  His  voice. 

Symbolically . This  thunder  signified  that  Jesus  was  the  Son  of 
God,  who  thunders  from  heaven,  and  consequently  that  He  Himself 
was  God  For  the  thunders  voice  refers  us  back  to  its  source,  and 
leads  us  to  venerate  Him,  and  announce  Him  to  the  Gentiles. 
Again,  it  signified  that  Jesus,  even  as  man,  not  merely  thundered 
Himself  with  His  mouth  and  flashed  forth  from  His  heart,  to  move 
hard  hearts  to  penitence  and  to  warm  cold  hearts  with  love ; but  also 
that  He  caused  the  Apostles  and  His  followers  to  thunder  and 
lighten.  In  fact,  He  gave  that  name  to  James  and  John,  calling 
them  Sons  of  Thunder  {Mark  Hi.  17).  And  S.  Paul  is  called  by  S. 
Jerome  (Epist  lxi.)  “The  trumpet  of  the  Gospel,  the  roaring  of 
our  Lion,  the  thunder  of  the  Gentiles,”  adding,  “ for  as  often  as  I 
read  him,  I seem  not  to  hear  words  only,  but  thunder.”  Hear  S. 
Chrysostom  {Horn,  xxxii.  in  Rom, .),  “Thunder  is  not  so  terrible, 
as  was  his  voice  to  the  devils.  For  if  they  dreaded  his  garments, 
much  more  did  they  dread  his  voice.  For  it  led  them  bound  and 
captive,  it  purified  the  world,  it  cured  diseases,  it  expelled  vice,  it 
brought  in  truth ; it  had  Christ  dwelling  within.  For  He  accom- 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


20 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XII. 


panied  him  everywhere,  and  just  as  were  the  Cherubim,  so  also  was 
the  voice  of  Paul.  For  as  God  sat  in  the  midst  of  these  heavenly 
Powers,  so  sat  He  on  the  tongue  of  S.  Paul.”  And  Nazienzen 
(Orat.  xx.)  says,  “The  words  of  S.  Basil  were  as  thunder,  because  his 
example  shone  as  lightning.”  Hence  the  voice  of  Christ  is  com- 
pared to  the  voice  of  many  waters  (Rev.  i.  15)  and  to  the  voice 
of  a multitude  (Dan.  x.  6). 

Others  said , an  angel  spake  to  Him.  For  this  voice  was  more 
dignified  than  that  of  a man.  It  was  therefore  angelic,  or  rather 
divine.  For  an  angel,  assuming  the  Person  of  God  the  Father,  had 
uttered  it. 

Ver.  30 .—Jesus  answered  and  said}  This  voice  came  not  because  of 
Me,  but  for  your  sakes . In  order  that  ye  may  believe  in  Me,  and 
be  saved.  I need  not  this  voice  for  my  own  sake,  for  I am  the 
Word  of  the  Father,  whom  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Spirit  glorify 
with  increate  and  boundless  glory.  But  ye  need  it,  because  some 
of  you  object,  that  I am  not  the  Son  of  God,  nor  sent  by  God ; 
others  have  doubts  on  the  matter.  But  this  voice  of  the  Father 
proclaims  the  contrary  of  both  these  statements,  so  as  to  remove 
all  doubt.  So  SS.  Augustine,  Bede,  Rupertus,  &c. 

Ver.  31. — Now  is  the  judgment  of  this  world,  &c.  Judgment 
here  signifies  condemnation,  the  condemnation  of  the  Jews  for 
condemning  Me  to  death.  So  SS.  Chrysostom,  Theophylact,  and 
Euthymius.  But  others  understand  it  to  mean  judgment  in  favour 
of  the  innocent  It  means,  in  this  sense,  the  time  is  at  hand  for  the 
deliverance  of  the  world  from  the  tyranny  of  Satan.  For  my  death 
is  at  hand,  by  which  this  deliverance  will  be  effected,  and  Satan 
will  be  cast  out  of  the  hearts  of  the  faithful.  Rupertus  acutely 
observes,  “Two  worlds  are  here  spoken  of,  one  the  enemy  of  God, 
the  other  reconciled  to  Him — the  one  lost,  the  other  saved.”  He 
founds  this  distinction  on  the  absence  or  the  presence  of  the  article 
[but  this  does  not  appear  in  the  Greek].  But  what  then  is  the  judg- 
ment of  this  world,  and  the  casting  out  of  the  prince  of  this  world  ? 
Surely  the  coming  Passion  of  Him  who  is  speaking : for  that  is  the 
judgment  of  this  world,  its  salvation  indeed,  as  separating  from  the 


Digitized  by  Gaogk 


JUDGMENT  OF  THE  WORLD. 


21 


reprobate  the  whole  body  of  the  elect  from  the  beginning  of  the 
world  to  the  hour  of  His  Passion  : and  the  casting  out  of  the  prince 
of  this  world,  holding  sway  over  the  lovers  of  the  world,  is  the 
reconciliation  of  the  elect  Gentiles.  “ Christ  therefore  here  signifies 
(i)  that  He  would  by  His  death  free  the  world  (that  is  the  Gentiles 
who  would  believe  in  Him)  from  sin  and  the  devil;  (2)  that  He 
would  drive  out  the  devil  from  the  hearts  of  the  faithful,  and  also 
from  the  temples,  that  the  true  God  might  be  worshipped  therein ; 
(3)  that  He  would  deprive  the  devil  of  the  power  he  had  heretofore 
exercised  in  tempting  men,  and  would  also  bestow  all-powerful 
grace,  by  which,  if  they  willed,  they  would  be  able  to  resist  tempta- 
tion ; (4)  Christ  cast  out  many  devils  from  the  bodies  of  men,  and 
consigned  them  to  hell.  So  Prosper  (in  Dtm.  Temp.)\  and  see 
Luke  viii.  31.  S.  Augustine  writes,  " He  foresaw  that  after  His 
Passion  and  glorification  many  people  throughout  the  whole  world 
would  believe  on  Him,  out  of  whose  hearts  the  devil  is  cast  when 
they  renounce  him  by  their  faith.  He  was  also  cast  out  of  the 
hearts  of  righteous  men  of  old.  But  it  is  said  here  that  he  will  be 
cast  out,  because  that  which  then  took  place  in  a very  few  cases, 
would  hereafter  take  place  in  many  and  great  multitudes.  He  is 
cast  out,  but  yet  ceases  not  to  tempt.  But  it  is  one  thing  to  rule 
within,  and  another  to  assail  from  without”  S.  Chrysostom  in  like 
manner  says,  “ As  if  a man  who  assaults  his  debtors  and  casts  them 
into  prison,  and  with  like  madness  throws  another  into  prison,  who 
owes  him  nothing  at  all,  will  have  to  pay  the  penalty  for  the  wrongs 
he  has  done ; so  will  the  devil  pay  the  penalty  for  the  wrongs  he 
has  done  us,  by  his  bold  assaults  against  Christ” 

Just  as  He  Himself  says,  Luke  xi.  21. 

Christ,  therefore,  knowing  that  the  Gentiles  longed  to  see  Him, 
was  grieved  that  the  whole  world  was  overwhelmed  with  heathenism, 
and  therefore  wishes  His  death  to  be  hastened,  in  order  that  He 
might  obtain  for  them  faith  and  grace  from  God,  and  might  send 
His  apostles  to  convert  them  to  God.  And  in  like  manner 
S.  Gregory  greatly  desired  the  conversion  of  the  Angles.  [Thi* 
Cornelius  tells  at  length] : 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


22 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XII. 


Ver.  32. — And  I,  if  I be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all 
things  unto  Me . “ Exalted  by  my  resurrection  and  ascension,” 

says  S.  Chrysostom.  But  other  commentators  refer  it  to  the  Cross, 
as  S.  John  himself  explains  it  “ Christ,”  says  Maldonatus,  “ speaks 
of  Himself  as  a soldier  contending  with  the  devil.  For  as  a soldier 
has  an  advantage  over  his  enemy  if  he  is  on  higher  ground,  so 
would  He,  from  His  Cross,  as  from  a very  high  and  well-defended 
post,  fight  against  the  devil  and  overcome  him.  And  therefore  He 
called  this  kind  of  death  an  exaltation.  When  exalted  He  drew  all 
to  Himself,  as  an  eagle  carries  his  prey  aloft  with  him.” 

In  like  manner  Mark,  the  Bishop  of  Arethusa  in  Syria,  when 
lifted  up  on  high,  and  besmeared  with  honey  to  attract  the  bees, 
laughed  at  his  torturers,  and  said  that  they  were  grovelling  on  the 
earth,  while  he  was  lifted  up  above  them.  (See  Theodoret,  Hist  iii.  7, 
Soz.  v.  10.)  But  Christ  alludes  to  the  lifting  up  of  the  brazen 
serpent  (see  chap . iii.  14),  and  thus  teaches  us  that  the  Cross  is 
not  to  be  dreaded,  but  desired,  for  it  alone  exalts. 

All  things . (1)  “Soul  and  body,”  say  S.  Augustine  and  Bede. 

(2)  But  Rupertus  says  : “ Heaven  and  earth,  men,  angels,  and  devils. 
Because  I will  cause  6 every  knee  to  bow,  of  things  in  heaven,  and 
things  in  earth,  and  things  under  the  earth’”  (Phil.  ii.  10).  (3)  All 

men  who  will  believe  in  Me,  all  nations  of  men.  The  Greek 
Fathers  read  vavrag.  But  Cornelius  prefers  the  Vulgate  “omnia”  as 
more  expressive,  signifying  all  the  choicest  things  of  the  world, 
all  the  spoils  of  the  devil.  The  Arabic  version  has  “ each  one,”  the 
Syriac  “ all” 

Draw.  Will  withdraw  from  the  devil  against  his  will,  and  not 
against  their  own  will.  For  I will  sweetly  allure,  and  effectually 
draw  them  to  Myself,  and  make  them  My  brethren ; nay  more,  My 
children,  that  as  I am  the  Son  of  God  by  nature,  so  they  may  be 
the  sons  of  God  by  adoption.  The  Greek  word  iXxu<r«  means,  I 
will  draw  them  by  force,  snatch  them  out  of  the  power  of  the  devil 
against  his  will,  and  strengthen  men,  moreover,  to  withstand  their 
several  temptations.  See  Matt.  xi.  12. 

Hear  S.  Leontius  (Serm.  viii.  de  Pass.),  treating  this  whole  passage 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


CHRIST  DRAWS  ALL  THINGS. 


23 


with  grace  and  tenderness.  “O  wondrous  power  of  the  Cross! 
O ineffable  glory  of  the  Passion,  wherein  is  seen  the  tribunal  of 
Christ,  the  judgment  of  the  world  and  the  power  of  the  Crucified ! 
For  Thou  didst  draw,  O Lord,  all  things  unto  Thee.  And  when 
Thou  didst  stretch  forth  Thine  hands  all  the  day  to  a disobedient  and 
gainsaying  people,  the  whole  world  felt  the  force  of  Thine  acknow- 
ledged Majesty.  Thou  didst  draw  all  things  to  thyself,  O Lord, 
when  in  execration  of  the  sin  of  the  Jews  all  the  elements  pronounced 
one  and  the  same  sentence,  when  the  luminaries  of  heaven  were 
obscured,  and  night  was  turned  into  day,  the  earth  also  was  shaken 
with  unwonted  quakings,  and  the  whole  creation  refused  its  aid  to  the 
service  of  the  wicked.”  He  afterwards  follows  up  the  subject,  and 
urges  it  still  more  forcibly,  " Thou  hast  drawn  all  things  to  Thee, 
O Lord.  When  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent,  and  the  holy  of 
holies  withdrawn  from  the  unworthy  priesthood,  in  order  that  the 
figure  might  be  changed  into  Truth,  prophecy  into  manifestation, 
and  the  Law  into  the  Gospel.  Thou  didst  draw  all  things  to  Thee, 
in  order  that  that  which  was  kept  hid  in  the  Jewish  temple,  by 
shadows  and  outward  signs,  the  devotion  of  all  nations  might  every- 
where set  forth  in  its  full  sacramental  force  before  the  eyes  of  all. 
For  now  there  is  a more  illustrious  order  of  Levites,  a higher  dignity 
of  elders,  and  a more  sacred  unction  of  priests.  Because  thy  Cross 
is  the  Fount  of  all  blessings,  the  Source  of  all  graces,  and  by  it 
believers  obtain  strength  out  of  weakness,  glory  out  of  shame,  and 
life  out  of  death.” 

Moreover,  Christ,  when  exalted  on  the  Cross,  between  heaven  and 
earth,  drew  all  things  to  Himself.  (1)  Because  He  reconciled  heaven 
and  earth,  Angels  to  the  Gentiles,  Gentiles  to  Jews,  and  God  to 
men.  For  He  is  our  peace,  &c,  Eph.  ii.  14.  (2)  Because  He  drew 

all  nations  of  the  world  to  the  faith  and  love  of  Himself.  He  drew 
them  from  the  earth  to  the  Cross ; to  penitence,  that  is,  to  continual 
mortification  and  martyrdom ; and  from  the  Cross  to  heaven.  He 
drew  them  by  the  merits  and  price  of  His  Blood ; by  His  example, 
and  by  His  Blood.  For  if  Christ,  of  His  own  accord,  died  for  us  on 
the  Cross,  who  would  not  love  Him  in  return  ? Who  would  not  say 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


24 


55.  JOHN,  C.  XTT. 


with  S.  Ignatius  among  the  lions,  “ My  love  is  crucified  ? ” See  Zech. 
xiil  6 on  the  words,  “ I was  wounded  in  the  house  of  my  friends.” 
(3)  Christ  on  the  Cross  drew  all  things  to  Himself,  ue.  the  Creator 
and  His  creatures.  For  God  by  this  sacrifice  was  propitiated  towards 
men,  the  sun  and  the  heavens  were  astonished,  and* as  though  be- 
wailing the  death  of  their  Creator,  withdrew  their  rays  from  the  earth, 
the  air  was  involved  in  the  thickest  darkness,  the  whole  earth,  con- 
vulsed and  shaken,  trembled  from  its  very  centre ; the  rocks  were  rent, 
and  the  graves  were  opened,  that  both  the  dead  as  well  as  the  living 
might  bewail  the  death  of  Christ.  All  creatures  therefore  looked  up 
towards  Christ  "crucified,  as  if  in  amazement,  and  as  offering  them- 
selves to  fjght  in  His  behalf  against  His  murderers  and  to  scatter 
them  abroad. 

The  Origenists  wrongly  inferred  from  this  passage,  that  Christ 
brought  tha,  lost  out  of  hell,  and  saved  them.  But  as  S.  Gregory 
explains  ( Epist  lib . vi.  15),  Christ  drew  all,  that  is,  the  elect. 
“ For  a man  cannot  be  drawn  to  God  after  death  who  has  separated 
himself  from  God  by  his  evil  life.” 

Symbolically . S.  Bernard  (Serm.  xxi.  in  Cant)  applies  Christ’s 
words  to  himself,  and  all  “Religious.”  For  they,  by  contempt  of 
earthly  and  love  of  heavenly  things,  are  lifted  up  from  the  earth, 
and  therefore  draw  all  things  to  them.  For  all  things,  whether 
adverse  or  prosperous,  work  together  for  their  good : and  they  them- 
selves possess  a source  of  wealth  by  trampling  it  as  it  were  under 
foot  " For  to  a faithful  man  the  whole  word  is  full  of  riches.” 

Ver.  33. — But  this  He  said , &c.  The  death  of  the  Cross.  These 
are  the  words  of  S.  John  inserted  parenthetically. 

Ver.  34. — The  people  answered  Him , We  have  heard  out  of  the  Law , 
that  Christ  abideth  ever,  and  how  sayest  Thou,  the  Son  of  Man  must 
be  lifted  up  f The  Jews  understood  that  Christ  spake  of  His  death 
on  the  Cross.  How  then  does  He  say  that  He  would  die,  when  the 
Law  says  that  He  would  not  die  ? S.  Augustine  says,  “ They  under- 
stood Him  to  mean  the  very  thing  which  they  were  contemplating. 
It  was  not  inspired  wisdom,  but  the  sting  of  their  conscience  which 
disclosed  to  them  the  meaning  of  these  obscure  words.” 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


CHRIST  TAUNTED. 


25 


Out  of  the  Law . By  the  Law  is  meant  the  whole  of  the  Old 
Testament.  They  understood  this  from  the  following  passages, 
Micah,  v.  2;  Ps.  cx.  14,  lxxxix.  30,  38,  lxxii.  5 j Is.  ix.  7,  xl  8; 
Ezek.  xxxvii.  27 ; Dan.  ix.  26.  But  these  passages  speak  of  the 
kingdom  of  Christ  after  His  ascension.  This  kingdom  will  be  eter- 
nal. But  Chrfet  elsewhere  foretold  His  death.  See  Is.  liii.  3; 
Ps.  xxii.  12,  17;  Dan.  ix.  26;  Jer.  xi  19. 

Who  is  this  Son  of  Man  f Meaning  thereby,  “ If  Thou  art  that 
Son  of  Man,  as  Thou  art  wont  to  call  Thyself,  how  dost  Thou  wish 
to  be  regarded  as  the  Christ  ? For  Christ,  according  to  the  Scrip- 
tures, as  has  just  been  said,  is  eternal,  and  cannot  die.  Whereas 
Thou  sayest,  on  the  contrary,  that  the  Son  of  Man  must  (Be  and  be 
raised-up  on  the  Cross.  If  there  be  any  other  Son  of  Man,  tell  us 
plainly  who  he  is.”  So  Toletus  and  Jansen.  Maldonatus  somewhat 
differently ; he  thinks  that  the  Jews  insulted  Christ,  as  if  tfiey  had 
refuted  His  claims,  and  taunted  Him,  as  a conqueror  would  taunt 
a king  whom  he  had  taken  captive.  As  the  Jews  afterwards  said 
(tauntingly)  to  Him,  “ Hail,  King  of  the  Jews  1 ” 

Ver.  35. — -Jesus  therefore  said  unto  them.  Yet  a little  while  is  the 
Light  with  you,  &c.  “Christ  would  not  answer  their  objections 
directly,  as  knowing  that  they  deserved  not  a reply,”  says  S.  Cyril. 
He  therefore  answers  indirectly,  that  they  should  use  Him  as  a light ; 
for  that  that  light  would  be  soon  extinguished  by  death,  when  they 
would  have  to  seek  for  Him  in  vain.  But  if  they  desired  to  use  that 
light  they  would  be  enlightened  by  it,  so  as  to  find  an  answer  to 
their  objection,  and  know  other  things  which  were  necessary  for  their 
salvation.  The  Latin  commentators  take  the  word  “ modicum  ” as 
referring  to  the  light,  thus,  “ a little  light”  Ye  have  but  little  light 
in  thinking  that  Christ  will  abide  for  ever.  But  ye  know  not  that 
He  will  also  die  and  rise  again.  Walk  therefore  while  ye  have  the 
light  Go  on  to  investigate  the  truth.  Ye  will  then  learn  how  Christ 
will  die,  and  yet  rise  again,  and  abide  for  ever.  (So  S.  Augustine, 
S.  Bernard,  Serm.  xlix.  in  Cant.  Lyra,  and  others).  But  the  word 
u modicum”  does  not  refer  to  the  light,  but  to  the  word  “time” 
as  is  plain  in  the  Greek.  He  calls  Himself  the  light  of  the  world. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


26  S.  JOHN,  C.  XII. 

for  the  reasons  which  are  mentioned  in  notes  to  chap,  i.,  and  also 
i John  i 5. 

(1.)  S.  Chrysostom  and  Theophylact  think  that  Christ  here  likened 
Himself  to  the  Light,  or  Sun,  because  as  the  light  of  the  sun  is  not 
extinguished  by  night,  but  is  only  hid  for  awhile,  and  rises  again  in 
the  morning,  and  shines  throughout  the  day,  so  He  would  die  and 
rise  again,  and  reign  for  ever,  which  was  the  very  thing  the  Jews  were 
inquiring  about. 

(2.)  It  may  be  explained  more  clearly  and  to  the  point  in  this 
way, — I,  Christ,  the  Light  of  the  world,  enlightening  it  with  the 
doctrine  and  knowledge  of  God,  of  salvation  and  of  things  eternal, 
shall  be  but  a short  time  (only  three  days)  with  you  in  the  body. 
And,  therefore,  if  ye  are  wise,  as  long  as  you  have  Me  with  you, 
embrace  and  follow  this  light,  believe  in  Me,  hearken  unto  Me, 
question  Me,  I will  resolve  all  your  doubts,  especially  how  Christ 
will  die,  and  yet  abide  for  ever.  But  if  ye  do  it  not  now,  the  light 
will  shortly  be  taken  from  you.  I shall  soon  die,  and  then  the 
darkness  of  error  will  overwhelm  you.  For  though  I shall  leave  the 
Apostles  after  Me,  to  carry  on  the  light  of  the  Gospel  which  I 
brought : yet  ye  will  not  value  them,  and  will  persecute  them,  and 
then  ye  will  in  vain  seek  for  Me,  who  am  the  very  source  of  light. 
Just  as  He  spake  to  the  same  Jews,  John  vii.  33. 

Christ  calls  Himself  the  Light.  Wherefore  S.  Chrysostom,  Theo- 
phylact, and  Rupertus  less  appropriately  understand  by  the  light, 
the  life  of  each  faithful  Christian,  which  is  as  it  were  to  each  one 
his  own  day.  Believe  in  Me  while  the  light  of  life  lasts,  for  after 
it  comes  the  darkness  of  death,  when  ye  will  not  be  able  to  believe, 
and  do  what  is  right. 

Symbolically.  Leontius  by  darkness  understands  sins ; Rupertus, 
the  sufferings  of  the  lost  in  outer  darkness. 

Ver.  36. — While  ye  have  the  lights  walk  as  children  of  the  light. 
Believe  in  Me,  who  am  the  light  of  the  world ; believe  that  I am  the 
Messiah,  the  Son  of  God,  the  Saviour  of  the  world believe  in  Me 
and  my  Gospel  (so  S.  Cyril  and  Theophylact),  that  ye  may  be 
my  children,  and  consequently  the  children  of  grace,  charity,  virtue, 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


FROM  WHOM  CHRIST  HIDES  HIMSELF. 


27 


and  sanctity  in  this  life,  and  the  children  of  the  Resurrection,  of 
happiness,  and  glory  in  the  next  life  (see  notes  on  1 John  i.  5,  John 
L 4.,  Eph.  v.  8). 

Tropologically . When  thou  feelest  the  enlightenment,  the  emo- 
tions, the  breath  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  act  on  them  at  once,  for  they 
come  and  go  like  lightning.  As  S.  Francis,  when  he  heard  the  voice 
of  God,  stopped  short  even  on  a journey,  that  he  might  listen  to  it, 
and  at  once  put  it  into  practice. 

These  things  spake  Jesus , and  departed , and  did  hide  Himself  from 
them.  Because  He  knew  that  they  wished  to  take  Him  before  the 
time  appointed  of  the  Father.  So  S.  Chrysostom,  Theophylact,  and 
others.  He  hid  Himself,  probably  at  night,  for  by  day  He  taught 
in  the  temple,  and  at  night  He  withdrew  to  Mount  Olivet,  and 
thence  to  Bethany  (see  Luke  xxi.  37). 

“He  withdrew  Himself  not,”  says  S.  Augustine  and  Bede,  “from 
those  who  began  to  believe  in  Him  and  to  love  Him.  Not  from 
those  who  came  out  with  palm  branches  and  praises  to  meet  Him. 
But  from  those  who  saw  Him  indeed,  but  with  an  evil  eye ; because 
in  truth  they  saw  Him  not,  but  in  their  blindness  stumbled  at  that 
stone  of  offence.” 

Symbolically . Rupertus  says,  “He  hid  Himself  from  them  not  in 
place  but  in  grace ; because  He  left  them  in  their  unbelief,  He 
blinded  and  hardened  them.” 

Ver.  37. — But  though  He  had  done  so  many  (rc<raura,  so  great) 
miracles  before  them , yet  they  believed  not  on  Him . S.  Chrysostom 
and  Euthymius  think  that  He  wrought  many  miracles  at  this  special 
time  to  lead  the  Jews  to  believe  in  Him,  which  S.  John  omitted  for 
the  sake  of  brevity.  But  others  consider,  more  correctly,  that  S. 
John  spoke  of  the  many  miracles  Christ  had  wrought  during  the 
whole  course  of  His  ministry.  As  if  Christ  said,  I have  proved  by 
so  many  miracles  that  I am  the  Messiah,  why  have  ye  not  believed 
in  Me  ? Ye  cannot  expect  more.  I am  about  to  die : believe  on 
Me  at  once,  before  I go  hence. 

The  reason  why  so  few  believed  on  Jesus,  and  the  many  did  not, 
was  partly  their  animal  life,  by  which  they  were  tied  down  to  earthly 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


28 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XII. 


desires,  and  did  not  understand  the  heavenly  blessings  and  that 
contempt  for  worldly  things  which  Christ  taught : and  partly  their 
fear  of  the  Scribes  and  Chief  Priests,  whom  they  knew  to  be  opposed 
to  Christ,  for  the  people  follow  the  belief  of  those  above  them : and 
partly  the  poverty,  lowliness,  and  humility  of  Christ,  which  they 
themselves  despised.  For  they  hoped,  and  even  now  hope,  that 
their  Messiah  would  come  with  great  pomp  and  wealth,  as  a secortd 
Solomon. 

Ver.  38. — That  the  saying  of  Esaias,  &c.  The  word  “ that  ” does 
not  signify  the  end  and  purpose  intended  by  God,  but  simply  the 
result.  The  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  resulted  from  the  unbelief 
of  the  Jews.  So  S.  Chrysostom,  Cyril,  and  others. 

The  passage  quoted  is  Is.  liii.  1,  on  which  see  a full  comment. 

Our  report  Our  hearing,  the  Hebrew  word  scernaa , hearing,  being 
put  for  that  which  was  heard  by  an  ordinary  Hebraism. 

The  arm  of  the  Lord.  That  is  Christ.  (1.)  So  called  as  being 
“of  one  Substance  with  the  Father,”  as  the  arm  is  of  the  same 
substance  as  the  body.  (2.)  Because  Christ,  as  God,  is  the  “arm” 
of  the  Father,  His  virtue  and  strength,  whereby  He  works  all  things 
mightily.  (3.)  Because  as  man  He  performed,  in  the  flesh,  the 
mighty  and  powerful  works  of  God.  (So  S.  Augustine,  Maldonatus, 
and  others,  on  this  passage;  and  S.  Jerome  on  Is.  liii.  and  S. 
Athanasius,  “L>e  communi  essentia  Patris  et  Filii  et  Sp . Sancti 
opus  dubiumf)  But  it  may  be  more  simply  understood  of  the  Divine 
power  which  manifested  itself  in  Christ’s  miracles.  The  meaning 
being,  How  few  Jews  recognised  the  power  of  God,  working  as  it 
did  in  Christ’s  Person  so  many  and  great  miracles.  So  Jansenius 
and  Maldonatus. 

Ver.  39. — Therefore  they  could  not  believe,  because  that  Esaias  said 
again , &c.  The  words  “therefore”  and  “because”  signify  not 
the  cause  of  their  unbelief,  as  Calvin  supposes,  but  marking  the 
necessary  consequence.  It  could  not  but  be  so,  because  it  had  been 
foretold,  and  Scripture  cannot  lie.  But  God  foretold  it,  because 
He  foresaw  that  through  their  freedom  of  will,  their  obstinacy  and 
malice,  they  would  not  believe  in  Christ.  God  therefore  saw  that 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


HOW  GOD  HARDENS. 


29 


they  would  not  believe,  because  they,  of  their  own  free  will,  would 
not  do  so.  But  they  did  not  refuse  to  believe,  because  God  foresaw 
that  they  would  not  believe.  For  their  unbelief  was  prior  to  God’s 
foreseeing.  God  foresees  the  future,  because  it  will  surely  come  to 
pass.  For  God  cannot  foresee  anything,  unless  it  is  presupposed 
that  it  will  really  take  place.  For  the  object  which  is  seen  is  prior 
to  the  act  of  seeing  it.  For  nothing  can  be  seen  but  that  which 
either  now  is,  or  hereafter  will  be.  So  S.  Chrysostom,  Jansenius, 
Maldonatus,  and  others. 

But  S.  Augustine,  and  after  him  Toletus,  explain  it  thus : the  Jews 
could  not  believe  in  Christ,  because  they  were  hardened  and 
blinded,  as  Isaiah  foretold.  But  then  the  words  “could  not” 
do  not  signify  absolute  necessity,  but  either  a moral,  that  is  a great, 
difficulty,  or  else  a conditional  difficulty.  That  is  to  say,  the  Jews 
could  not  believe  in  Christ,  supposing  they  continued  to  hold 
fast  to  their  sins,  darkness,  and  ignorance ; and  therefore  blinded 
and  hardened  themselves  by  their  own  wickedness.  For  otherwise, 
though  they  were  blinded  and  hardened,  yet  as  having  free  will,  and 
sufficient  grace  to  enable  them,  they  could  (speaking  abstractedly) 
give  up  their  hardness  of  heart  and  turn  to  God. 

He  hath  blinded  their  eyes , and  hardened  their  hearts . Christ 
quotes  Is.  vi.  9,  10.  Having  fully  explained  this  passage  before,  I 
will  here  briefly  repeat  what  I there  said.  Observe  then  (1)  that 
properly  speaking  the  intellect  is  said  to  be  blinded,  but  the 
affections  and  will  to  be  hardened ; (2)  that  the  direct  and  proper 
cause  of  a man’s  blindness  and  hardening,  is  his  own  free  will  and 
wickedness.  See  Wisdom  ii.  21.  The  Arabic  and  Syriac  versions 
understand  it  in  this  way,  “ their  eyes  are  blinded,  and  their  heart 
is  hardened.”  But  yet  God  is  said  indirectly  and  in  a less  strict 
sense  ( improprie ) to  harden  a man,  because  He  gradually  withdraws 
from  Him  the  light  of  truth  and  grace,  and  allows  opportunities 
of  error  and  sin  to  be  presented  to  him  by  the  world,  the  flesh,  and 
the  devil,  in  punishment  for  his  former  sins. 

Moreover,  in  Isaiah  we  read  “ blind  thou  the  heart  of  this 
people,”  these  being  the  words  of  God  to  Isaiah.  But  it  comes  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


30  S.  JOHN,  C.  XII. 

the  same  meaning.  For  “blind  thou,”  is  the  same  as  “foretell  that 
a man  will,  indirectly,  be  blinded  by  Me.”  “ He  blinded  ” is  then 
the  same  as  “ He  will  blind.”  The  past  is  put  for  the  future,  to 
signify  the  certainty  of  the  thing,  that  it  will  as  surely  come  to  pass 
as  though  it  had  already  happened  ; that  the  Jews  will  be  as  surely 
blinded,  as  though  they  had  been  blinded  already. 

Ver.  41. — These  things  said  Esaias , when  he  saw  His  glory , and 
spake  of  Him,  The  glory  of  Christ  the  Incarnate  Son  of  God,  who 
is  spoken  of  in  what  preceded,  and  what  follows.  So  SS.  Augustine, 
Cyril,  and  all  the  Fathers,  as  against  the  Arians.  It  is  therefore 
quite  clear  that  Christ  the  Son  of  God  is  “ of  one  substance  ” with 
the  Father,  having  the  same  substance,  majesty,  and  glory  with  Him. 
For  the  Jews  deny  not  that  these  words  and  that  Divine  glory 
pertain  to  God  the  Father,  nor  can  there  be  any  doubt  on  the 
matter.  But  here  it  is  said  that  the  same  glory  belongs  to  the  Son. 
And  it  is  plain  that  the  same  is  the  glory  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (Acts 
xxviii.  25).  And  therefore  when  the  Holy  Trinity  thus  appeared  to 
Isaiah,  the  Seraphim  thrice  exclaimed,  Holy,  Holy,  Holy,  &c. 

This  glory  then  which  Isaiah  saw,  was  that  glorious  vision  in  which 
the  Essential  Nature  of  the  Holy  Trinity  and  the  Three  Persons 
severally  were  represented  in  some  ineffable  manner  by  some  out- 
ward symbol  addressed  to  the  imagination.  But  yet  it  was  a kind 
of  human  appearance  ; for  God  appeared  to  Isaiah  as  a king  seated 
on  a lofty  throne,  and  the  prophet  describes  His  countenance  and 
His  feet.  And  this  appearance  was  most  glorious,  bright,  and 
majestic.  And  accordingly,  S.  John  terms  it  “glory.”  Therefore 
Ribera,  Maldonatus,  Toletus,  and  others  say  that  Isaiah  in  that  vision 
most  clearly  discerned  (as  far  as  man  can  discern  in  this  mortal 
state)  the  Three  Persons  in  Unity  of  Essence.  And  this  too  both 
from  the  words  of  the  Seraphim,  as  also  from  that  most  exalted 
revelation  which  was  made  to  him.  And  therefore  he  says,  “ When 
he  saw  His  glory,”  when  there  was  shown  to  him  by  revelation  the 
Person  of  the  Son  as  co-equal  and  consubstantial  with  the  Father 
and  the  Holy  Ghost.  (See  more  on  Is,  vi.  1). 

Ver.  42. — Nevertheless  among  the  chief  rulers  also  many  believed 


'digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


LOVE  OF  HUMAN  GLORY. 


31 


on  Him,  &c.  By  the  chief  rulers  are  not  meant  the  chief  priests 
and  the  magistrates,  for  they  shortly  afterwards  took  Jesus  and  put 
Him  to  death.  But  the  chief  persons,  those  who  were  pre-eminent 
for  their  wisdom,  their  authority,  and  their  means,  both  among  the 
priests  and  the  common  people.  S.  Rupertus.  They  therefore 
were  convinced  by  the  truth  of  Christ’s  doctrine,  by  His  holiness 
and  miracles,  but  yet  did  not  dare  to  confess  Him  openly,  for  the 
reason  mentioned  above,  chap.  ix.  22. 

Ver.  43. — For  they  loved  the  glory  of  men  more  than  the  glory  of  God. 
“ Glory  ” may  here  be  taken  in  an  active  sense.  They  loved  to  give 
glory  to  men — to  the  Jews,  e.g.,  and  the  Pharisees — by  saying  that 
they  were  wise  and  sound  teachers  of  the  Law,  rather  than  to  Jesus 
Christ,  by  acknowledging  Him  to  be  the  Messiah. 

Secondly,  in  the  passive  sense  (and  this  is  the  best  meaning), 
they  preferred  to  be  glorified  by  men  rather  than  by  God,  to  hear 
the  Pharisees  say,  “Ye are  the  true  Israelites,  who  abide  in  the  faith 
of  your  fathers,  and  prefer  Moses  to  this  innovator  Jesus,  and  the 
ancient  religion  of  the  Israelites  to  the  novelties  of  this  sect  of 
Christians.  So  Augustine,  Cyril,  Bede,  Chrysostom,  Theophylact, 
and  others.  They  therefore  had  the  faith  of  Christ,  but  not  charity. 
For  if  they  had  had  it  they  would  have  loved  the  glory  of  God, 
rather  than  that  of  men,  and  would  have  professed  with  their  lips 
the  faith  of  Christ  which  they  held  in  their  heart.”  See  Rom.  x.  10. 

Many  such  are  found  at  the  present  time  in  England,  Germany, 
and  Poland,  who  cherish  in  their  minds  faith  and  piety,  but  who 
dare  not  profess  them  outwardly,  for  fear  of  incurring  the  derision 
and  scoffs  of  worldlings  or  heretics.  Against  these  Christ  thunders 
forth,  “ Whosoever  shall  be  ashamed  of  Me  and  of  my  words,”  &c. 
(Luke  ix.  26.) 

The  Gloss  says  wisely  (quoting  S.  Augustine  in  loci),  “ The  Cross  is 
marked  on  the  forehead,  which  is  the  seat  of  shame,  to  keep  us  from 
blushing  at  the  Name  of  Christ,  and  seeking  the  praise  of  men 
rather  than  the  praise  of  God.” 

Ver.  44 .—Jesus  cried  and  said,  He  that  believeth  on  Me,  believeth 
not  on  Me  (“only”  as  adds  the  Arabic  version)  but  (also)  on  Him  that 


Digitized  by  GUOQle 


32 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XII. 


sent  Me.  It  is  uncertain  whether  Jesus  said  these  words  at  the  same 
time  as  those  ^hich  precede  them  (ver.  35),  as  Maldonatus  thinks, 
i.e.  before  he  hid  Himself  and  withdrew  (as  I said,  ver.  36),  being 
there  mentioned  by  anticipation,  when  in  the  regular  order  it  should 
be  placed  at  the  end  of  the  chapter ; or  at  another  time,  as  Theophy- 
lact  supposes.  It  is  in  fact  a question  to  be  solved.  For  Christ  in 
these  last  three  days  of  His  life,  came  back  in  the  morning  to  the 
Temple.  But  when  He  saw  that  some  believed  not,  and  that  others 
believed  but  did  not  dare  to  profess  their  faith,  for  shame,  and  for 
fear  of  the  Pharisees,  He  cried  with  a loud  voice,  to  drive  away  this 
shame  and  fear : “ He  that  believeth  in  Me  ” believeth  not  in  a 
mere  poor  and  wretched  man,  but  in  a man  who  is  also  God,  and  he 
therefore  “ believes  in  God  who  sent  Me,”  in  God  the  Father  with 
Whom  I am  consubstantial.  Be  not  ashamed  of  my  poverty  and 
humility,  for  though  I am  outwardly  poor  and  humble,  yet  in  my 
inward  nature  I am  rich  and  highly  exalted.  For  I am  God  of  God. 
And  therefore  he  that  believeth  in  Me  believeth  in  God.  But  what 
is  more  noble  and  glorious  than  to  believe  in  God  ? What  can  he 
fear  or  be  ashamed  of  who  believes  in  God?  S.  Cyril  adds,  " Jesus 
cried  out,  to  signify  that  He  did  not  wish  to  be  worshipped  in  a 
cowardly  and  stealthy  way,  but  that  He  wished  us  boldly  and 
clearly  to  profess  and  proclaim  the  faith.”  “ Again  He  cried  out,” 
says  Rupertus,  “ because  He  had  but  little  time  left  Him  to  preach  in. 
He  then  who  wishes  to  hear  Me,  to  believe  and  be  saved,  should  do 
so  at  once,  for  after  three  days  no  one  will  be  able  to  hear  Me.”  And 
so  S.  Chrysostom  says,  “ Why  do  ye  fear  to  believe  in  Me  ? Faith 
in  God  comes  through  Me.  Just  as  he  who  drinks  the  water  of  the 
river,  drinks  he  not  of  the  source  ? ” And  S.  Augustine,  “ Because 
the  manhood  only  appeared  to  men,  and  the  Godhead  was  latent, 
lest  they  should  think  Him  to  be  only  that  which  they  saw  (a  man), 
and  He  wished  Himself  to  be  believed  in  (as  God)  the  same  and 
as  great  as  the  Father ; He  saith,  ‘ He  that  believeth  in  Me, 
believeth  not  in  Me,*  that  is,  in  that  which  He  seeth,  ‘ but  in  Him 
who  sent  Me,  that  is,  in  the  Father.*  ” 

It  is,  however,  quite  plain  that  the  Son  is  God,  consubstantial  with 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BELIEVING  IN  GOD. 


33 

God  the  Father.  The  Arians  denied  this,  and  objected  : He  who 
believeth  in  the  Apostles  who  were  sent  by  God,  believeth  in  God, 
and  yet  does  not  believe  that  the  Apostles  are  gods.  I reply  by 
denying  the  conclusion.  We  believe  the  Apostles,  but  not  in 
the  Apostles.  But  Christ  here  says,  “ He  who  believeth  in  Me, 
believeth  in  Him  who  sent  Me.”  But  no  one  believes  in  any  one, 
excepting  in  Him  who  is  God.  If,  then,  we  believe  in  Christ,  we 
believe  that  He  is  God  : and  since  there  is  but  one  God,  we 
believe  that  He  is  numerically  the  same  God  with  God  the  Father. 
And  therefore  He  says,  “ He  that  believeth  in  Me,  believeth  in 
Him  that  sent  Me ; ” He  who  believes  in  Me  as  God  the  Son, 
believes  also  in  God  My  Father,  for  we  have  both  one  nature  and 
one  majesty.  So  SS.  Augustine,  Cyril,  Theophylact,  Euthymius,  and 
others.  Whence  Christ  adds,  to  make  it  clearer  still, — 

Ver.  45. — And  he  that  seeth  Me,  seeth  Him  that  sent  Me . Because 
the  nature  of  us  both  is  one  only.  And  just  as  through  My  man- 
hood he  sees  the  Godhead  which  is  latent  therein,  so  does  he  also 
see  the  Godhead  of  My  Father,  since  it  is  one  and  the  same.  And 
so  S.  Augustine  says,  “ He  shows  that  there  is  no  difference 
whatever  between  Himself  and  the  Father,  insomuch  that  He  who 
seeth  Him  seeth  the  Father.” 

Hear  S.  Cyril  in  the  Council  of  Ephesus  (speaking  in  our  Lord’s 
name)  : " Oh,  my  faithful  hearers,  do  not  think  meanly  and  humbly 
of  Me.  But  rather  be  most  fully  persuaded  of  this  respecting  Me, 
that  if  ye  believe  in  Me,  ye  will  believe  in  Him  who  is  not  merely 
one  among  many,  but  in  the  Father  Himself  through  Me  His  Son, 
and  that  though  I became  man  for  your  sakes,  yet  am  I in  every 
respect  equal  to  the  Father,  and  in  no  respect  whatever  severed  or 
separated  from  Him,  inasmuch  as  I am  endowed  with  the  same 
nature,  power,  and  glory  with  Him.” 

Ver.  46. — I am  come  a Light  into  the  world , See.  Christ  calls 
Himself  again  and  again  the  Light  of  the  world,  which  sets  forth  the 
true  faith  in  God,  His  worship,  devotion  towards  Him,  virtue,  and 
all  things  which  tend  to  our  salvation,  and  also  dispels  the  darkness 

of  unbelief,  idolatry,  and  all  errors  and  vices,  so  that  what  the 
VOL.  v.  c 


Digitized  by 


Google 


34 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XII. 


sun  is  in  the  material  world,  is  He  in  the  spiritual.  “The  word 
light,”  says  S.  Cyril,  “ indicates  Godhead,  for  it  is  the  property  of 
God  to  be  the  Light  of  the  world.  For  God  in  His  Essence  is 
spiritual,  uncreate,  boundless  Light,  from  which  every  created  light, 
whether  spiritual  or  material,  whether  of  angels  or  men,  whether  of 
the  sun  or  stars  or  of  the  elements,  is  derived  as  a ray  from  the 
Sun.”  But  it  is  the  peculiar  property  of  the  Son  that  He  proceeds 
from  God  the  Father  after  the  manner  of  a ray,  and  of  light, 
according  to  the  Nicene  Creed  : “ Light  of  Light,  Very  God  of 
Very  God.”  For  He  proceedeth  from  the  Father  by  understanding 
and  knowledge,  as  the  verbal  expression  of  the  mind,  which,  like 
the  brightest  mirror,  represents  all  things.  As  the  Book  of  Wis- 
dom says  (vii.  26),  “It  is  the  brightness  of  the  everlasting  light, 
the  unspotted  mirror  of  the  power  of  God,  and  the  image  of  His 
goodness.”  And  Heb.  i.  3,  “Who  being  the  brightness  of  His 
glory,  and  the  image  of  His  substance.”  And  Ecclus.  xxiv.  6 
( Vulg. ;),  “I  made  the  never-failing  Light  to  arise  in  the  heavens.” 
These  things  are  spoken  of  Christ  as  God.  But  as  man  He  was 
sent  by  God  the  Father  into  the  world,  to  enlighten  it  as  the  sun 
in  the  heavens,  when  overwhelmed  with  the  darkness  of  ignorance, 
unbelief,  and  sin.  See  S.  John,  i.  6,  7. 

Symbolically , S.  Gregory  (Moral,  xxv.  4)  says  that  eternal  Light, 
which  is  God,  the  more  changelessly  it  shines  the  more  piercingly 
does  it  see.  Even  things  which  are  hid  it  knows  well,  for  it  pene- 
trates through  all  things,  and  keeps  them  in  memory,  because  it 
changelessly  abides.  And  consequently,  whenever  we  conceive  in 
our  minds  an  unworthy  thought,  we  sin  in  the  light  Because  It  is 
present  to  us,  even  when  we  are  not  present  to  It.  And  when  we 
walk  in  crooked  ways  we  stumble  against  that,  from  which  we  are 
in  our  deserts  far  away.  But  when  we  believe  that  we  are  not  seen, 
we  keep  our  eyes  closed  in  the  sunlight.  That  is,  we  hide  Him 
from  ourselves,  but  not  ourselves  from  Him. 

The  same  S.  Gregory  (Epist.  vii.  32,  ad Dom.)  says,  “.The  warmth 
of  the  shepherd  is  the  light  of  the  flock.  For  the  priest  of  the  Lord 
should  shine  forth  in  his  conduct  and  life,  in  order  that  the  people 


digitized  by  Google 


NOW  IS  THE  TIME  OF  MERCY.  3$ 

committed  to  his  charge  may  be  able  in  the  mirror  of  his  life  to 
choose  what  to  follow,  and  see  what  to  correct” 

Ver.  47. — And  if  any  hear  My  words , and  keep  them  not , I judge 
him  not  That  is,  does  not  retain  them  in  his  mind,  “ believes  them 
not,”  as  in  the  Greek,  though  the  Vulgate,  agreeing  with  the  Syriac 
and  Arabic,  reads  “ Keep  them  not ; ” as  Christ  explains  in  the  next 
verse.  By  the  words  “ / judge  him  not,”  Christ  means,  I came  not 
into  the  world  to  judge  it  but  to  save  it.  But  a man  who  believes 
not  on  Me,  is  at  once  condemned  and  judged  by  his  own  wicked- 
ness and  unbelief,  and  also  by  the  eternal  decree  of  the  Father. 
This  is  plain  from  what  follows.  So  S.  Cyril,  Theophylact,  Leontius, 
and  others.  See  notes  on  chap.  iii.  18.  This  decree  of  the  Father 
I will  execute  at  the  day  of  judgment,  when  1 shall  return  to  judge 
the  world,  as  I have  now  come  to  redeem  it  S.  Chrysostom  says, 
M I judge  not,”  that  is,  I am  not  the  cause  of  his  ruin,  but  he  is  him- 
self its  cause  in  despising  My  words. 

For  I came  not  to  judge  the  world,  but  to  save  the  world.  That  is, 
the  inhabitants  of  the  world.  “Now,”  says  S.  Augustine,  “is  the 
time  of  mercy,  hereafter  the  time  of  judgment.” 

Ver.  48. — He  that  rejecteth  Me,  and  receiveth  not  My  words,  hath 
one  that  judgeth  him.  He  that  believeth  not  My  words  will  have 
God  as  his  Judge,  who  will  judge  him  by  Me  at  the  judgment  day. 
For,  as  S.  Augustine  says  (de  Trinit  i.  28),  Christ  will  not  judge 
by  His  human  power,  but  by  the  power  of  the  Word  of  God. 

The  word  that  I have  spoken,  the  same  shall  judge  him  at  the  last 
day.  S.  Augustine  (in  loc.)  understands  by  the  “Word”  Christ 
Himself,  for  He  will  be  the  Judge.  “He  has  sufficiently  set  forth 
that  He  will  be  the  Judge  at  the  last  day,  for  He  spake  of  Himself. 
He  announced  Himself,  He  placed  Himself  as  the  Door  by  which 
He  as  Shepherd  came  in  to  the  sheep.”  Others  more  clearly,  and 
with  greater  force,  say,  My  word  heard  and  not  believed  in  by  the 
Jews  will  accuse  them  at  the  day  of  judgment,  and  with  mute  voice 
will  proclaim  them  worthy  of  hell  “ That  word,”  says  Rupertus, 
“which  they  heard,  which  they  could  not  but  know  to  be  true,  as 
approved  by  the  wondrous  testimony  of  His  miracles,  that  word  will 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


36 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XII. 


judge,  will  reprove,  will  convict.  But  where  will  that  Judge  be 
seated  ? What  sentences  of  judgment  will  He  give  from  His  throne? 
He  will  be  close  at  hand.  He  will  hold  His  court  within.  He  will 
proclaim  full  terribly  in  the  conscience  of  each  one  His  just  sentence. 
There  is  a prosopopoeia.  The  word  of  Christ  is  here  introduced  as 
a person,  and  as  a witness  against  unbelievers  before  Christ  as 
Judge  in  the  day  of  judgment. 

Ver.  49. — For  1 have  not  spoken  of  Myself  & c.  This  gives  the 
reason  why  the  word  of  Christ  would  condemn  the  Jews,  because 
He  spake  at  the  command  of  the  Father,  and  therefore  he  who 
believed  not  in  Him  believed  not  in  God.  He  who  despised  Him 
despised  God,  and  would  therefore  experience  Him  as  his  Judge. 
So  the  Syriac  version.  Rupertus  somewhat  differently  says,  “ The 
word  which  I spake  has  the  force  of  a judgment,  for  I speak  not  of 
Myself.”  SS.  Augustine,  Ambrose,  and  Bede  think  that  Christ  is 
here  speaking  of  Himself  as  God.  I,  as  God,  speak  not  from 
Myself,  but  from  the  Father  who  gave  Me  My  Divine  Nature,  and 
with  It  omniscience,  and  My  full  power  of  saying  and  speaking. 
Hear  S.  Augustine,  “In  the  Wisdom  of  the  Father,  which  is  the 
Word,  are  all  the  commands  of  the  Father.  But  the  command  is 
said  to  be  given,  since  He  to  whom  it  is  given,  is  not  of  Himself. 
But  to  give  to  the  Son  is  the  same  as  begetting  the  Son.”  “All 
these  things  were  said,”  says  S.  Chrysostom,  “ for  their  sakes  that 
they  might  have  no  excuse.”  And  the  Gloss,  “ The  Father  gave 
the  command  to  the  Son,  by  begetting  Him,  as  His  Very  Word  and 
Wisdom,  as  He  gave  Him  life  by  begetting  Him  who  is  life.” 

More  simply  S.  Cyril  and  Chrysostom  think  that  Christ  is  here 
speaking  of  Himself  as  man.  For  thus  did  He  properly  receive  a 
command  from  the  Father  to  say  or  speak  this  or  that,  and  nothing 
else.  Christ  speaks  of  Himself  in  an  humble  manner,  in  order  to 
move  the  haughty  Jews,  who  believed  Him  not  to  be  God.  As  if 
He  said,  “ Granting  that  I am  a mere  man,  as  ye  think,  yet  ye  ought 
to  believe  Me,  for  I speak  nothing  of  Myself,  but  all  things  which  I 
speak  I have  heard  of  the  Father.”  Hence  theologians  infer  (though 
some  deny  it)  that  Christ  received  a command  from  God  for  saying 


5ed  by  Google 


DIFFERENCE  BETWEEN  TO  SAY  AND  TO  SPEAK.  3 7 

everything  He  said,  and  for  doing  everything  He  did.  For  if  the 
Father  commanded  Him  in  these  lesser  matters,  He  did  so  in  greater 
matters,  as  the  working  of  miracles  and  mighty  deeds.  What 
Rupertus  says  is  an  adaptation  to  circumstances.  “ I have  received 
a commandment  from  the  Father  what  to  say  now  forbearingly  to 
those  who  gainsay  Me,  and  what  I shall  pronounce  terribly  in  the 
last  judgment,  when  no  one  will  dare  to  gainsay  Me.” 

What  I shall  say , and  what  I shall  speak.  Between  saying  and 
speaking  there  is  this  difference.  To  say  ( dicere ) is  solemnly  to  assert 
anything,  to  teach,  to  preach.  To  speak  (loqui)  is  to  say  anything 
in  a more  familiar  manner,  colloquially.  (See  Varro,  de  Lingua 
Latina , lib.  v.,  Cicero,  de  Oratore , and  Quintilian,  lib.  x.  chap.  7.) 

Ver.  50. — And  I know  that  His  commandment  is  life  everlasting. 
The  way  which  leads  to  eternal  life.  w If  thou  wouldest  enter  into 
life,  keep  the  commandments.”  It  is  also  formally  eternal  life 
because  the  commandment  of  God  is  that  eternal  Law  which  lives 
in  the  eternal  reason  of  things,  in  the  living  mind  of  God.  But  Christ 
is  not  speaking  of  this.  And  therefore  He  asserts  that  the  command 
is  eternal  life,  causally,  because  it  causes,  merits,  and  brings  about 
eternal  life.  Christ  says  this,  says  S.  Chrysostom,  “ to  induce  the 
Jews  to  believe  Him  in  those  things  which  He  spake  by  the 
command  of  the  Father,  to  induce  them  by  the  hope  of  the  highest 
reward,  and  consequently  by  the  fear  of  the  heaviest  punishment  if 
they  do  not  believe  in  Him.  He  tacitly  threatens  them  with  this  by 
way  of  antithesis.  And  to  keep  them  from  doubting  this  He  boldly 
asserts  it  I maintain,  says  Christ,  and  assert  of  My  own  sure  know- 
ledge, that  the  command  of  God  is  the  cause  of  eternal  life.  I have 
heard  it  from  God  Himself,  and  I therefore  know  fully  and  surely 
that  it  has  been  decreed  by  Him  as  an  inviolable  law.  In  like 
manner  Christ  says,  “ This  is  life  eternal  ” (that  is,  the  way  to  life 
eternal),  “ to  know  Thee  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom 
Thou  hast  sent”  (John  xvii.  3). 

Christ  alludes  to  Ecclus.  i.  5,  “ The  Word  of  God  Most  High  is  a 
fountain  of  wisdom,  and  the  entrance  thereto  everlasting  command- 
ments ; ” and  to  Baruch  lii.  9.  “ If  then,”  says  S.  Augustine 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XII. 


38 

(Serm.  clxxxvi.  (nunc  cclxvii.)  Dc  Temp.),  “ye  wish  to  have  the 
Holy  Spirit,  hold  fast  to  charity,  love  the  truth,  long  for  unity,  and 
ye  will  attain  to  eternity.” 

Christ  therefore  summed  up  all  His  teaching  to  the  people  in  this 
saying,  “ His  commandment  is  eternal  life,”  in  order,  when  he  was 
now  going  to  death,  to  impress  on  the  Jews  and  on  all  who  should 
come  after  the  perpetual  memory  of  eternity,  and  a longing  for  life 
everlasting;  to  stimulate  them  to  follow  His  faith  and  examples. 
For  nothing  so  stimulates  the  mind  for  good,  as  a serious  and 
frequent  meditation  on  eternity.  As  the  Psalmist  says  (Ps.  cxix.  96), 
“ I have  seen  an  end  of  all  perfection,  but  Thy  commandment  is 
exceeding  broad.”  This  means,  all  sublunary  things  have  an  end, 
but  the  commandment  of  God  has  no  end.  It  endures  for  ever, 
and  leads  those  who  keep  it  to  a blessed  eternity,  but  those  who 
despise  it  to  eternal  punishments.  Sufferings  are  momentary,  but 
delights  are  eternal  But  momentary  are  our  delights,  our  sufferings 
eternal. 

Symbolically , S.  Augustine  says,  “If  the  Son  Himself  is  eternal 
life,  and  the  commandment  of  God  is  eternal  life,  what  else  is  meant, 
but  that  I am  the  commandment  of  the  Father?  ” 

Whatsoever  I speak  therefore  (“  in  announcing  Myself  to  be  the 
Word,”  says  the  Interlinear  Gloss),  even  as  the  Father  said  unto  Me , 
so  1 speak.  That  is,  “ As  He  who  is  True  begat  Me  who  am  Truth, 
so  I the  Truth  proclaim  Myself  as  Truth.”  And  S.  Augustine,  “Just 
as  the  Father  spake  as  being  True,  so  does  the  Son  speak  as  being 
the  Truth;  the  True  begat  the  Truth.” 

The  genuine  printed  commentary  of  S.  Cyril  here  begins  again. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


( 39  ) 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

I  Christ  before  the  institution  of  the  Eucharist  washes  the  feet  of  His  disciples \ 
17  Foretells  that  He  is  soon  to  be  betrayed  by  Judas , and  points  him  out  to 
John  by  means  of  a morsel  of  bread,  34  He  gives  the  new  commandment  of 
lovef  and  foretells  to  Peter  his  {Peter's)  treble  denial  of  Him, 

NOW  before  the  feast  of  the  passover,  when  Jesus  knew  that  his  hour  was 
come  that  he  should  depart  out  of  this  world  unto  the  Father,  having 
loved  his  own  which  were  in  the  world,  he  loved  them  unto  the  end. 

2  And  supper  being  ended  (the  devil  having  now  put  into  the  heart  of  Judas 
Iscariot,  Simon’s  son,  to  betray  him), 

3  Jesus  knowing  that  the  Father  had  given  all  things  into  his  hands,  and  that 
he  was  come  from  God,  and  went  to  God ; 

4  He  riseth  from  supper,  and  laid  aside  his  garments  ; and  took  a towel,  and 
girded  himself. 

5  After  that  he  poureth  water  into  a bason,  and  began  to  wash  the  disciples’ 
feet,  and  to  wipe  them  with  the  towel  wherewith  he  was  girded. 

6  Then  cometh  he  to  Simon  Peter  : and  Peter  saith  unto  him,  Lord,  dost  thou 
wash  my  feet  ? 

7  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  him,  What  I do  thou  knowest  not  now ; but 
thou  shalt  know  hereafter. 

8  Peter  saith  unto  him,  Thou  shalt  never  wash  my  feet.  Jesus  answered  him, 
If  I wash  thee  not,  thou  hast  no  part  with  me. 

9  Simon  Peter  saith  unto  him,  Lord,  not  my  feet  only,  but  also  my  hands  and 
my  head. 

10  Jesus  saith  to  him,  He  that  is  washed  needeth  not  save  to  wash  his  feet, 
but  is  clean  every  whit : and  ye  are  clean,  but  not  alL 

11  For  he  knew  who  should  betray  him  ; therefore  said  he,  Ye  are  not  all 
clean. 

12  So  after  he  had  washed  their  feet,  and  had  taken  his  garments,  and  was  set 
down  again,  he  said  unto  them,  Know  ye  what  I have  done  to  you  ? 

13  Ye  call  me  Master  and  Lord  : and  ye  say  well ; for  so  I am. 

14  If  I then,  your  Lord  and  Master,  have  washed  your  feet,  ye  also  ought  to 
wash  one  another’s  feet. 

15  For  I have  given  you  an  example,  that  ye  should  do  as  I have  done  to  you. 
16  Verily,  verily,  I say  unto  you,  The  servant  is  not  greater  than  his  lord ; 
neither  he  that  is  sent  greater  than  he  that  sent  him. 

17  If  ye  know  these  things,  happy  ate  ye  if  ye  do  them. 

18  IF  I speak  not  of  you  all : I know  whom  I have  chosen : but,  that  the  scripture 
may  be  fulfilled.  He  that  eateth  bread  with  me  hath  lifted  up  his  heel  against  qie. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


. 40  S.  JOHN,  C.  XIII. 

49  Now  I tell  you  before  it  come,  that,  when  it  is  come  to  pass,  ye  may  believe 
that  I am  he, 

20  Verily,  verily,  I say  unto  you,  He  that  receiveth  whomsoever  I send  receiveth 
me ; and  he  that  receiveth  me  receiveth  him  that  sent  me. 

21  When  Jesus  had  thus  said,  he  was  troubled  in  spirit,  and  testified,  and  said, 
Verily,  verily,  I say  unto  you,  that  one  of  you  shall  betray  me. 

22  Then  the  disciples  looked  one  on  another,  doubting  of  whom  he  spake. 

23  Now  there  was  leaning  on  Jesus’  bosom  one  of  his  disciples,  whom  Jesus  loved. 

24  Simon  Peter  therefore  beckoned  to  him,  that  he  should  ask  who  it  should 
be  of  whom  he  spake. 

25  He  then  lying  on  Jesus’  breast  saith  unto  him,  Lord,  who  is  it  ? 

26  Jesus  answered,  He  it  is  to  whom  I shall  give  a sop,  when  I have  dipped  it. 
And  when  he  had  dipped  the  sop,  he  gave  it  to  Judas  Iscariot,  the  son  of  Simon. 

27  And  after  the  sop  Satan  entered  into  him.  Then  said  Jesus  unto  him,  That 
thou  doest,  do  quickly. 

28  Now  no  man  at  the  table  knew  for  what  intent  he  spake  this  unto  him. 

29  For  some  of  them  thought,  because  Judas  had  the  bag,  that  Jesus  had  said 
unto  him,  Buy  those  things  that  we  have  need  of  against  the  feast ; or,  that  he 
should  give  something  to  the  poor. 

30  He  then  having  received  the  sop  went  immediately  out : and  it  was  night. 

31  H Therefore,  when  he  was  gone  out,  Jesus  said,  Now  is  the  Son  of  man 
glorified,  and  God  is  glorified  in  him. 

32  If  God  be  glorified  in  him,  God  shall  also  glorify  him  in  himself,  and  shall 
straightway  glorify  him. 

33  Little  children,  yet  a little  while  I am  with  you.  Ye  shall  seek  me  : and 
as  I said  unto  the  Jews,  Whither  I go,  ye  cannot  come  ; so  now  I say  to  you. 

34  A new  commandment  I give  unto  you,  That  ye  love  one  another  ; as  I have 
loved  you,  that  ye  also  love  one  another. 

35  By  this  shall  all  men  know  that  ye  are  my  disciples,  if  ye  have  love  one  to 
another. 

36  IT  Simon  Peter  said  unto  him,  Lord,  whither  goest  thou?  Jesus  answered 
him,  Whither  I go,  thou  canst  not  follow  me  now  ; but  thou  shalt  follow  me 
afterwards. 

37  Peter  said  unto  him,  Lord,  why  cannot  I follow  thee  now  ? I will  lay  down 
my  life  for  thy  sake. 

38  Jesus  answered  him,  Wilt  thou  lay  down  thy  life  for  my  sake?  Verily, 
verily,  I say  unto  thee,  The  cock  shall  not  crow,  till  thou  hast  denied  me  thrice. 

Ver.  1. — Before  the  Feast  of  the  Passover.  About  the  thirteenth 
day  of  the  first  month  ; the  Passover,  say  the  Greeks,  having  to  be 
celebrated  by  the  Law  of  the  Jews  on  the  fourteenth  day.  For 
they  make  out  from  these  very  words  of  John  that  Christ,  on 
account  of  the  approach  of  His  Passion,  anticipated  the  Pasch, 
celebrating  it  on  the  thirteenth  day,  and  therefore  ate  the  lamb  with 
leavened  and  not  with  unleavened  bread.  For  the  use  of  unleavened 
bread  began  with  the  Passover  on  the  fourteenth  day.  For  this 


Digitized 


TIME  OF  THE  PASSOVER.  4 1 

reason  they  say  that  Christ  consecrated  the  Eucharist  with  leavened 
bread,  and  they  therefore  consecrate  and  celebrate  in  leavened  and 
not  unleavened  bread.  But  this  is  opposed  to  the  other  Evange- 
lists, who  assert  that  Christ  celebrated  the  Pasch  and  instituted  the 
Eucharist  on  the  first  day  of  unleavened  bread — on  which  day  the 
Jews  used  to  sacrifice  the  Paschal  Lamb — the  fourteenth  day  of  the 
month,  for  thus  the  Law  prescribes  in  Exodus  xii.  As  for  what  John 
says,  that  Christ  did  it  on  the  day  before  the  feast  of  the  Passover, 
this  must  be  understood  to  mean  His  having  done  it  on  the  four- 
teenth day,  in  the  evening  preceding  the  feast, — preceding  the 
first  day  of  unleavened  bread,  which  was  the  fifteenth  day,  the  morn- 
ing of  the  Friday  on  which  Christ  was  crucified.  And  in  favour  of 
this  view,  it  is  to  be  observed  that,  though  the  sacrifice  of  the  lamb 
took  place  on  the  fourteenth  day,  in  the  evening,  still  the  feast  of 
the  first  day  of  unleavened  bread  properly  began  on  the  morning  of 
the  fifteenth.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  John  says  Christ  celebrated 
the  Pasch  on  the  day  before  the  Feast  of  the  Pasch,  because 
He  celebrated  it  in  the  evening  of  the  fourteenth  day.  But  the 
other  three  Evangelists,  because  they  couple  the  evening  of  the 
fourteenth  day  with  the  morning  of  the  fifteenth,  as  being  one  and 
the  same  feast  (for  feasts  were  begun  by  the  Hebrews  on  the  evening 
of  the  day  before,  and  lasted  until  the  evening  of  the  succeeding  day, 
as  is  still  the  practice  in  the  Vespers  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Office),  for 
this  reason  say  that  Christ  celebrated  the  Passover  and  the  Eucharist 
on  the  first  day  of  unleavened  bread,  the  fourteenth  day  of  the 
month,  in  the  evening,  this  being  the  beginning  of  the  festival,  and 
belonging  to  both  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  days.  So  that  if  we 
take  it  as  being  the  end  of  the  fourteenth  day,  it  must  be  considered 
as  being  before  the  first  day  of  unleavened  bread.  But  if  we  take  it 
in  the  beginning  of  the  feast  to  be  held  on  the  next  day,  then  in  this 
sense  it  belonged  to,  and  was  called,  the  fifteenth  day  or  the  first  day 
of  unleavened  bread,  as  the  other  three  Evangelists  call  it. 

Jesus,  knowing  that  the  hour  was  come  for  Him  (by  His  Cross  and 
death)  to  pass  from  this  world  to  the  Father \ This  is  an  allusion  to 
the  name  Passover , — a passing , or  rather  a leaping  oi’er.  Jesus, 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


42 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XTTT. 


knowing  that  it  was  now  the  Feast  of  the  Passover,  when  the 
Hebrews  of  old,  led  by  Moses,  went  out  of  Egypt  and  passed  into 
the  promised  land  by  the  immolation  of  the  lamb  (for  it  was  by 
the  blood  of  this  lamb  that  they  were  delivered  from  the  angel 
when  he  smote  the  Egyptians),  the  type  of  His  Immolation,  which 
was  about  to  be  accomplished  on  the  Cross,  and  by  which  He  was 
about  to  pass  from  this  world  into  heaven  and  return  to  His  Father 
on  the  day  of  His  Ascension,  that  so  He  might  cause  us  also  to  pass 
thither,  and  leap  after  death  from  the  world  into  heaven,— know- 
ing this,  He  prepared  Himself  for  this  day  by  heroic  acts  of  the 
supremest  humility — inasmuch  as  He  washed  the  feet  of  His  dis- 
ciples— and  of  the  sublimest  love — inasmuch  as  He  instituted  the 
Eucharist  By  these  acts  He  prepared  for  death  and  martyrdom 
that  He  might  teach  us  to  do  likewise,  to  multiply  and  intensify 
towards  the  end  of  our  lives  our  virtuous  actions,  especially  our  acts 
of  humility  and  charity.  And  this,  first,  because  it  becomes  us  to 
grow  and  advance  in  virtue  daily,  with  the  advance  of  our  lives,  to 
pass  the  latest  day  and  hour  of  life  in  the  holiest  manner,  and  to  be 
already  beginning  the  heavenly  life,  thought,  and  habits  to  which 
we  aspire.  Secondly,  because  it  is  right  that  when  we  go  out  of  this 
world  we  should  leave  our  brethren,  our  associates,  our  friends,  and 
all  men  a great  example  of  virtue,  for  the  things  which  we  do  when 
going  away  from  them,  or  dying,  make  a more  lasting  impression 
on  the  minds  of  our  friends.  Thirdly,  because  it  is  fitting  that  we 
should  be  prepared  in  this  manner  for  a generous  death,  in  some 
cases  for  martyrdom,  and,  as  it  were,  earn  it  from  God.  Thus  S. 
Laurence,  two  days  before  his  martyrdom,  prepared  himself  for  it 
by  washing  the  feet  of  the  poor  and  distributing  to  them  the 
treasures  of  the  Church,  and  this  was  for  him  the  occasion — even 
the  meritorious  cause — of  so  glorious  a martyrdom.  So  too  SS. 
Cyriacus,  Largus,  Smaragdus,  and  Sisinnius  the  Deacons,  minister- 
ing to  the  ten  thousand  Christian  soldiers  condemned  by  Diocletian 
to  labour  in  the  construction  of  his  baths,  carrying  on  their  shoulders 
the  burdens  of  old  men,  and  distributing  the  alms  supplied  to  them 
by  S.  Marcellijs  the  Pope  and  Thraso,  obtained  as  their  reward 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


LOVE  TO  THE  END.  43 

the  glorious  laurels  of  martyrdom,  as  appears  from  the  record  of 
their  acts  in  Surius. 

Moreover,  faithful  and  pious  souls  pass  from  this  world  in  one 
way — those  without  faith  in  another.  For,  as  S.  Augustine  says 
( Tract  55),  “ It  is  one  thing  to  pass  from  the  world,  another  to  pass 
with  it ; one  thing  to  pass  to  a Father,  another  thing  to  a foe.  For 
the  Egyptians  too  passed  over  ...  yet  did  they  not  pass  through 
the  sea  to  the  kingdom,  but  to  destruction  in  the  sea.” 

Having  loved  His  own  (the  faithful  ones  of  His  household,  the 
Apostles  whose  feet  He  soon  after  washed)  who  were  in  the  world. 
Cyril  thinks  that  this  is  added  for  the  sake  of  distinguishing  them 
from  the  angels  who  are  in  heaven  ; but  S.  Chrysostom,  Theophylact, 
and  Euthymius  consider  it  as  marking  the  distinction  of  the  patriarchs 
and  prophets  who  were  not  now  in  the  world  but  in  Limbo,  as 
having  passed  away  from  this  life.  The  connection  is  more  appro- 
priate with  the  preceding  “ for  Him  to  pass  from  this  world”  Being 
about  to  leave  the  Apostles,  His  most  dear  children,  in  the  world, 
and  in  its  troubles,  perils,  and  persecutions,  so  numerous  and  so 
great,  Jesus,  taking  pity  on  them,  gave  them,  before  He  went,  the 
highest  token  of  His  love  towards  them,  and  furnished  them,  in  the 
Eucharist,  with  the  supreme  remedy  for  all  the  tribulations  of  the 
world,  that  in  it  He  might  always  be  present  to  them  to  fortify  and 
strengthen  them  against  all  that  might  be  opposed  to  their  salvation. 

He  loved  them  to  the  end \ To  the  end  of  life,  unto  death,  say  S. 
Cyril,  S.  Augustine,  and  Rupert ; or,  as  S.  Chrysostom  (Horn.  69) 
explains  it,  always.  Whence  Nonnus  says,  “ Having  loved  His 
own  from  the  beginning,  so  also  He  loved  them  to  the  end.” 

Secondly,  to  the  end  of  His  love — He  loved  them  with  a supreme 
love,  the  Greek  rt\oe,  end,  being  put  for  riXg/W/;,  perfection,  as  S. 
Chrysostom,  Leontius,  and  Theophylact  explain.  Euthymius  too 
interprets  “ to  the  end  ” as  vehemently , for  riXo;  is  the  end,  the  last,  the 
sum  of  a thing,  its  highest  perfection,  its  issue,  completion,  and 
crowning  point  Christ  had  hitherto  loved  His  disciples  exceedingly, 
but  now,  being  about  to  pass  away  to  the  Father,  He  manifested  to 
them  His  most  perfect  love  by  washing  their  feet,  by  instituting  the 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


44 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XTIT. 


Eucharist,  by  exhorting  them  with  the  most  ardent  charity,  and  by 
rousing  them  to  the  love  of  God,  to  constancy,  and  to  all  virtue. 

Of  these  two  meanings  the  former  is  the  plainer  and  simpler,  and, 
therefore,  that  which  Christ  first  intended  ; the  latter,  however,  is  the 
more  full  of  meaning,  and  therefore  Christ  had  it  in  view  at  the  same 
time.  So  says  Toletus.  For  He  (Christ)  gives  it  to  be  understood 
that  His  love  to  His  disciples  was  so  great  that,  though  He  knew  a 
fearful  and  instant  death  to  be  awaiting  Him,  yet,  as  though  forgetful 
of  this,  He  poured  forth  His  whole  being  in  the  love  and  service  of 
His  disciples.  Wherefore  S.  Thomas  ( Opusc \ 57)  says,  “Where- 
fore, that  the  vastness  of  this  charity  might  be  the  more  deeply 
impressed  upon  the  hearts  of  the  faithful  in  the  Last  Supper,  when, 
after  celebrating  the  Pasch  with  His  disciples,  He  was  about  to 
pass  from  this  world  to  the  Father,  He  instituted  this  sacrament  as 
an  everlasting  memorial  of  His  Passion,  the  fulfilment  of  ancient 
types,  the  greatest  of  the  miracles  wrought  by  Him,  and  the  peculiar 
solace  for  their  grief  at  His  absence.” 

S.  Augustine  and  Bede  understand  Christ  by  the  end,  symbolically. 
For  Christ  is  “ the  end  of  the  Law  ” (Rom.  x.  4) ; He  loved  His  own, 
therefore,  to  the  end ’ that  is,  on  account  of  Himself,  or  by  communi- 
cating to  them  His  own  glory.  The  Interlinear  says  that  He  loved 
His  own  unto  the  end,  that  is,  by  dying  for  them,  that  they  by  His 
love  might  pass  from  the  world. 

And  supper  being  over , when  Satan  had  put  it  into  the  heart  of 
Judas , the  son  of  Simon  the  Iscariot,  to  betray  Him . After  the  legal 
supper  and  the  common  supper  too,  before  the  Sacred  Supper — the 
institution  of  the  Eucharist — Christ  washed  the  feet  of  His  disciples ; 
for  by  this  washing  He  wished  to  show  with  how  great  purity  and 
humility  we  ought  to  approach  the  Eucharist.  Observe  that  Christ 
partook  of  a triple  supper  with  His  disciples,  the  ceremonial,  the 
ordinary  supper,  and  the  Supper  of  the  Eucharist.  In  families  of 
ample  means,  the  lamb  being  insufficient  to  satisfy  the  hunger  of  so 
many  persons,  there  usually  followed  the  ordinary  supper,  at  which 
they  ate  other  kinds  of  meat.  And  so  Christ  washed  the  feet  of  the 
Apostles  after  the  two  former  suppers  and  before  the  third.  And 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


CHRIST  WASHES  HIS  DISCIPLES*  FEET.  45 

hence  it  is  clear  this  washing  of  feet  was  not  merely  the  ordinary 
usage  of  the  Jews  according  to  which  they  were  accustomed  to  wash 
the  feet  of  their  guests,  but  a sacramental  ablution,  by  which  Christ 
was  preparing  His  disciples  for  the  reception  of  the  Eucharist,  con- 
verting the  ordinary  usage  into  a sacred  ceremony.  So  that  they  are 
in  error  who  gather  from  this  passage  that  Christ  washed  the  feet  of 
His  disciples  after  the  Eucharistic  Supper  and  before  the  lengthy 
discourse  which  He  then  made  them,  and  which  is  subjoined  by 
John.  Of  this  number  is  S.  Cyprian,  or  whoever  is  the  author  of 
the  “ Treatise  on  the  Washing  of  Feet.”  “ The  Lord,”  he  says,  “ had 
now  distributed  to  the  Apostles  the  Sacrament  of  His  Body; 
Judas  had  now  gone  out ; when,  rising  from  the  table,  He  girt  Him- 
self with  a towel,  and  at  the  knees  of  Peter  the  Lord  Himself, 
on  bended  knee,  about  to  wash  the  feet  of  His  servant,  discharged 
towards  him  an  office  of  consummate  humility.” 

When  the  devil \ The  betrayal  of  Christ  by  Judas  being  now  at 
hand — the  result  of  a diabolical  prompting — and  His  murder  by  the 
Jews,  He  wished  first  to  leave  us  in  the  Eucharist  a perpetual 
memorial  of  Himself,  by  means  of  which  He  would  also  recall  to 
our  minds  His  Passion  and  Death  endured  for  us,  and  so  incite  us 
to  a reciprocal  love  of  Him.  Again,  John  mentions  the  treachery 
of  Judas  in  order  to  increase  our  appreciation  of  Christ’s  humility, 
patience,  and  loving-kindness.  For,  knowing  that  He  had  been 
sold  for  money,  and  was  soon  to  be  betrayed  by  Judas,  He  never- 
theless was  so  persistent  in  the  love  of  His  Disciples  that  He  wished 
to  wash  their  feet,  even  the  feet  of  Judas.  So  say  S.  Cyril,  S. 
Chrysostom,  S.  Augustine,  Theophylact,  Euthymius,  and  Rupert. 
The  Evangelist  tells  us  that  the  devil  put  this  treachery  into  the 
heart  of  Judas ; by  which  he  wishes  to  imply  that  its  atrocity  was 
such  that  it  could  only  have  been  the  work  of  the  devil. 

Ver.  3. — Knowing  that  the  Father  gave  all  things  into  His  hands , 
and  that  He  came  forth  from  God  and  went  to  God.  That  is,  first, 
though  Christ  knew  Himself  to  be  such,  and  so  great  as  to  have  all 
things  in  His  power,  and  indeed  to  be  Very  God  of  Very  God,  and 
that,  as  He  had  come  forth  from,  so  he  was  about  to  return  to,  and 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


46 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIII. 


sit  down  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  yet  He  humbled  Himself  so  fai 
as  to  kneel  down  and  wash  the  feet  of  His  disciples  and  of  Judas 
His  betrayer.  So  Cyril,  Augustine,  Bede,  and  S.  Gregory  ( Morals , 
Book  iii.,  chap.  12).  Maldonatus  adds  that  Christ  knew  that  all  things 
were  given  Him  by  the  Father , that  is,  that  it  was  now  permitted  Him 
by  the  Father’s  ordinance  to  complete  all  the  things  that  were 
given  Him  to  do ; — that  hitherto  He  had  not  been  permitted  to  die, 
because  the  time  appointed  by  the  Father  had  not  yet  come,  but 
that  now  that  time  had  come  when  it  was  permitted  Him  to  do  all 
that  belonged  to  the  redemption  of  man. 

Again,  John  here  assigns  three  very  fitting  and  efficacious  motives 
which  impelled  Christ  to  wash  the  feet  of  His  disciples.  The  first 
is,  that  “ the  Father  gave  all  things  into  His  hands  ; ” that  is,  because 
the  Father  intrusted  to  Him  the  salvation  of  mankind,  and  com- 
mitted their  whole  care  to  Him ; for  this  trust  incited  Him  to 
leave  to  mankind  before  His  departure  these  stupendous  examples 
of  humility  and  charity.  As  for  what  is  meant  by  the  Father’s 
making  over  all  things  to  Christ,  see  the  remarks  on  Matt  xi.  27. 

The  second  motive  was  that  “ He  came  forth  from  God”  It  was 
fitting  that  Christ  the  Son  should  by  this  washing  of  feet  manifest 
His  supreme  love  and  reverence  towards  God  the  Father.  For  by 
nothing  is  God  more  honoured  and  gratified  than  by  our  humility ; 
so  that  humility  is  the  highest  praise  of  God. 

And  the  third  was  that  “ He  went  to  God”  Knowing  that  His 
death  was  near  at  hand,  and  wishing  the  last  act  of  His  life  to  be 
one  of  the  most  sublime  virtue,  He  would  now  do  an  act  of  the 
greatest  charity  and  humility,  and  leave  it  as  a legacy  to  posterity. 
Such  is  the  view  of  Toletus. 

He  rises  from  supper  and  lays  aside  His  garments , and  taking  a 
towel  girded  Himself  John  enumerates  all  the  actions,  conditions, 
and  circumstances  of  the  washing  of  feet  to  show  us  how  attentive, 
exact,  and  observant  of  decorum  Christ  was  in  this,  as  in  all  else 
that  He  did,  that  we  may  learn  to  do  likewise  even  in  the  smallest 
matters,  according  to  the  words  of  Ecclus.  xxxiii.  23,  “ In  all  thy 
works  [be  thou  careful  to]  excel" 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


CHRIST’S  HUMILITY. 


4 7 


Lays  aside  Hts  garments — the  outer  tunic,  keeping  on  the  inner 
lest  His  body  should  be  exposed ; or  rather  the  robe  which  those 
about  to  partake  of  supper  usually  put  on  over  their  ordinary  dress. 
The  Greek  has  i/uanct,  the  outermost  garments  or  garment ',  such  as 
the  toga  or  pallium.  By  the  figure  of  enallage  the  plural  number  is 
here  put  for  the  singular. 

Girt  Himself— that  He  might  not  soil  His  garments,  that  He 
might  be  the.  more  unimpeded  in  the  work  of  washing,  that  He 
might  wipe  their  feet  when  He  had  washed  them,  and  also  that  He 
might  assume  for  this  servile  office  the  servile  garb  which  befitted 
it,  and  in  this  way  abase  Himself  completely.  “ What  wonder,”  says 
S.  Augustine,  “if  He  who,  when  He  was  in  the  form  of  God,  did 
make  Himself  void,  arose  from  supper  and  laid  aside  His  gar 
ments?”  For  humility  is  the  distinctive  virtue  of  Christ  and 
Christians.  S.  Basil  ( Constit .,  chap,  xvi.)  says  that  humility  guards 
the  treasure-house  of  the  virtues.  Humility,  says  S.  Macarius 
(HomiL  xv.),  is  the  badge  of  Christianity,  which  he  who  lacks  is  a 
vessel  of  the  Evil  One  ; humility  is  the  ballast  of  the  virtues.  This 
is  what  S.  Augustine  says  in  his  first  Discourse  on  Psalm  xxiii. 
“ As  David  laid  Goliath  low,  it  is  Christ  who  hath  slain  the  devil. 
And  what  is  the  Christ  who  hath  slain  the  devil  ? Humility  hath 
slain  pride.  When  therefore,  my  brethren,  I mention  Christ,  humi- 
lity is  chiefly  commended  to  us.  For  by  humility  He  hath  made 
a way  for  us,  inasmuch  as  by  pride  we  had  receded  from  God. 
Except  by  humility  we  could  not  have  returned  to  Him,  and  we 
had  none  to  set  before  us  as  an  example  to  imitate,  for  all  mortals 
had  become  puffed  up  with  human  pride.  And  if  there  existed  any 
man  humble  in  spirit,  as  were  the  prophets  and  patriarchs,  the 
human  race  disdained  to  imitate  humble  persons.  Then  let  not 
man  disdain  to  imitate  a humble  man ; God  hath  become  humble 
that  so  the  pride  of  the  human  race  might  at  least  not  disdain  to 
follow  the  footsteps  of  God.” 

Ver.  5. — Then  He  puts  water  into  a bason  and  begins  to  wash 
the  feet  of  His  disciples , and  wipe  them  with  the  towel  with  which 
He  was  girded.  S.  Cyprian,  Theophylact,  and  Euthymius  note  that 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIII. 


- 48 

Christ  did  all  these  things  by  Himself,  without  the  aid  or  help  of 
any  one,  to  teach  us  how  attentively  and  carefully  we  ought  to  serve 
others.  Euthymius  adds  that  Christ  Himself  asked  the  master  of 
the  house  for  the  basin,  and  drew  and  brought  the  water.  “ What 
wonder,”  says  S.  Augustine  ( Tract  55),  “if  He  who  poured  forth 
His  blood  on  the  earth  to  wash  away  the  uncleanness  of  sin  poured 
water  into  a bason  to  wash  the  feet  of  His  disciples  ? What  wonder 
if  He  who  made  firm  with  the  flesh  He  had  taken  upon  Him  the 
footsteps  of  His  Evangelists,  wiped  with  the  towel  He  was  girded 
with  the  feet  that  He  had  washed  ? ” 

Symbolically , S.  Ambrose  (Book  i.,  “On  the  Holy  Spirit ”)  says, 
“This  water  was  the  heavenly  dew.  This  it  was  that  was  pro- 
phesied, that  with  that  heavenly  dew  the  Lord  Jesus  should  wash 
the  feet  of  His  disciples.”  And  later  on,  “Come,  therefore,  O 
Lord  Jesus ! put  off  the  garments  that  Thou  hast  for  my  sake  put 
upon  Thee ; be  Thou  naked,  that  Thou  rnayest  clothe  us  with  Thy 
mercy.  Gird  Thyself  for  our  sakes  with  linen,  that  Thou  mayest 
gird  us  with  the  immortality  of  Thy  (muneris  immortalitate ) free 
gift.  Pour  water  in  the  bason,  and  wash  not  our  feet  only  but  our 
head  also ; and  not  only  those  of  the  body,  but  I would  also  put  off 
from  the  footsoles  of  the  mind  all  the  uncleanness  of  my  frailty,  that  I 
too  may  say,  ‘ 1 have  put  off  my  garment  in  ^he  night,  how  shall  I put 
it  on?  I have  washed  my  feet,  how  shall  I soil  them?*”  (Cant,  v.) 

Ver.  6. — He  comes  therefore  to  Simon  Peter:  so  as  to  begin  here* 
as  elsewhere  with  Peter,  the  Head  and  Primate  of  the  Apostles. 
For  if  He  had  gone  first  to  the  other  Apostles,  they  would  assuredly 
have  protested  as  much  as  Peter  against  so  great  and  unusual  an 
act  of  condescension  on  the  part  of  their  Lord ; but  <when  they  saw 
Peter  acquiesce  after  having  been  rebuked  by  Christ,  they  too 
acquiesced,  and  allowed  their  feet  to  be  washed  by  Him.  So  S. 
Augustine,  Bede,  Rupert,  Maldonatus,  and  others. 

Christ  here  indicates  figuratively  that  visitation  and  reformation 
must  be  begun  with  the  head  and  those  who  bear  rule,  for  that  so 
it  will  be  easy  to  reform  the  faithful  who  are  subject  to  them. 
However,  Origen  and  Leontius  think  that  Peter  was  the  last  in  this 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


CHRIST’S  HUMILITY. 


49 


washing  of  feet,  and  with  Chrysostom,  Theophylact,  and  Euthy- 
mius,  hold  that  Christ  first  of  all  washed  the  feet  of  Judas  that  He 
might  soften  his  heart  and  recall  him  from  his  wicked  treason, 
and  might  give  us  an  example  of  the  love  of  our  enemies,  that  we 
may  repay  their  injuries  with  kindness,  and  do  them  the  more  good 
the  more  spiteful  we  feel  them  to  be  towards  us. 

And  Peter  says  to  Him , Lord,  dost  Thou  wash  my  feet  ? That  is, 
dost  Thou  prepare  to  do  so?  The  action  is  represented  as  just 
beginning,  or  rather  intended,  for  Christ  had  not  yet  begun  to  wash 
his  feet.  Peter  said  this  in  stupefied  amazement  at  the  humility 
of  Christ,  and  out  of  the  depth  of  his  reverence  for  Him,  says 
Cyril ; and  hence  every  one  of  the  words  is  emphatic.  Thou  who 
art  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords,  my  feet,  who  am  a low 
fisherman,  and  but  a worm  of  this  earth,  feet  that  are  muddy  and 
filthy,  dost  Thou  wash  them  with  Thine  own  blessed  hands? 
“ These  things,”  says  S.  Augustine,  “ must  be  thought  upon  rather 
than  spoken  of,  lest  the  tongue  fail  to  express  what  the  mind  has 
more  or  less  worthily  comprehended  by  these  words.” 

Ver.  7 .—Jesus  answered  and  said  to  him , What  I do  thou  knowest 
not  now,  but  hereafter  thou  shalt  know \ Christ  means  that  in  this 
washing  of  feet,  mysteries  are  hidden  which  as  yet  Peter  knew  not. 
“ Peter,”  says  S.  Ambrose  (in  his  work,  De  Us  qui  initiantur^ 
ch.  6),  “saw  not  the  hidden  meaning,  and  therefore  rejected  the 
service,  thinking  that  the  humility  of  the  servant  would  be  com- 
promised should  he  suffer  his  Lord  to  do  him  this  office.”  “ Her* 
after  thou  shalt  know,”  that  is,  first,  “ when  I shall  tell  you  (ver.  14) 
that  I do  this  to  give  to  thee,  to  the  apostles,  and  to  the  rest  of 
the  faithful  an  example  of  the  greatest  humility  and  most  sublime 
charity ; ” so  S.  Cyril  interprets.  Secondly,  because  by  this  ablution 
penance  is  signified,  and  this  sacrament  must  precede  that  of  the 
Eucharist,  as  thou,  O Peter,  shalt  understand  after  the  Holy  Spirit 
has  been  sent,  for  “ He  shall  teach  you  all  things.”  So  S.  Cyprian, 
(Tract,  de  Coend  Dom.\  S.  Pacianus  (Ep.  1,  contra  JVovat.)9 
S.  Gregory  (bk.  ix.  Ep.  39),  and  SS.  Augustine  and  Bernard 

imply  the  same.  It  was  as  a type  of  this  that  the  Jewish  priests 
vol.  v.  d 


^Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


SO 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIII. 


used,  when  entering  the  temple  to  sacrifice,  to  wash  their  hands 
and  feet  in  the  brazen  laver  that  was  set  for  this  purpose  in  front  of 
the  Holy  of  Holies ; and  this  they  did  for  the  sake  of  bodily  cleanli- 
ness, that  by  it  they  might  be  admonished  of  spiritual  purity. 

On  this  point  S.  Ambrose  is  singular  in  his  view ; for  in  his  work 
“On  the  Sacraments”  (bk.  iii.  ch.  i,  and  in  De  Us  qui  initiantur , 
ch.  6)  he  holds  that  this  bodily  washing  of  feet  is  necessary  for  all 
the  faithful  before  baptism,  that  by  it  they  may  be  prepared  for  the 
Holy  Eucharist  just  as  Christ  prepared  the  apostles.  Hence  he 
maintains  that  the  washing  of  feet  is  a kind  of  sacrament  or  sacred 
rite  here  sanctioned  by  Christ,  by  which  we  are  to  be  strengthened 
against  the  devil’s  endeavours  to  trip  us  up.  And  for  this  reason 
he  reckons  the  washing  of  feet  amongst  the  rites  or  ceremonies  of 
baptism,  so  that  it  came  into  use  as  such  at  Milan.  S.  Bernard,  too, 
in  his  sermon  “ On  the  Lord’s  Supper,”  calls  the  washing  of  feet  a 
sacrament,  and  implies  that  it  has  power  for  the  remission  of  venial 
sins ; “ for,”  he  says,  “ that  we  may  not  be  in  doubt  about  the 
remission  of  our  daily  sins,  we  have  the  sacrament  of  it — the  washing 
of  feet”  By  “sacrament”  however,  S.  Bernard  here  understands 
symbol  or  figure, , as  he  himself  explains  a little  farther  on. 

Symbolically , Origen  and  S.  Jerome  (in  his  epistle  to  Damasus  on 
the  first  vision  of  Isaiah)  think  that  Christ  washed  His  apostles’ 
feet  to  prepare  them  for  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  according  to 
the  words,  “ How  beautiful  are  the  feet  of  them  that  preach  the 
gospel  of  peace,  of  them  that  bring  good  tidings!”  (Isa.  Iii.  7.) 
Secondly,  S.  Ambrose  thinks  that  Christ  in  baptism  washes  away 
actual  sin  by  washing  the  head,  but  that  here,  in  washing  their  feet, 
He  washed  away  the  remains  of  original  sin,  the  movements  of  con- 
cupiscence, for  that  by  this  washing  He  strengthened  their  feet — that 
is,  their  affections — to  make  generous  resistance  to  their  lower 
appetites. 

Thirdly,  S.  Augustine  and  S.  Bernard  (Lc.)  say  that  by  the 
feet  with  which  we  tread  the  earth  are  signified  the  loves,  the 
stains,  and  the  defects  which,  while  we  are  amid  the  things  of  earth, 
adhere  to  our  affections,  as  dust  or  mud  to  our  feet. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


ANCIENT  CUSTOMS  AT  BAPTISM. 


SI 


S.  Ambrose  (Be  Initiandis , ch.  6)  gives  the  mystical  reason 
for  the  washing  of  feet  as  follows  : — “ Peter  was  clean,  but  He 
must  wash  his  foot,  for  he  had  by  inheritance  the  sin  of  the  first  man 
when  the  serpent  tripped  him  up  and  led  him  astray ; and  therefore 
is  his  foot  washed,  that  these  hereditary  sins  may  be  taken  away.” 
He  alludes  here  to  the  word  spoken  by  God  to  the  serpent,  “Thou 
shalt  ensnare  his  heel”  (Gen.  iii.  15).  The  same  Saint  says  again 
(Be  Sacratn , book  iii.  ch.  1),  “Because  Adam  was  tripped  up 
by  the  devil  and  the  venom  was  poured  out  over  thy  feet,  therefore 
dost  thou  wash  thy  feet  that  in  that  part  where  the  serpent  ensnared 
thee  there  may  be  added  the  more  abundant  aid  of  sanctification,  so 
that  he  be  not  able  to  trip  thee  up  hereafter,”  x.  r.  X. 

Another  more  literal  reason  was  that  those  who  were  to  be  bap- 
tized used  to  go  barefooted  as  a sign  of  hiimility.  This  going  bare- 
footed is  called  by  S.  Augustine  (“On  the  Creed,”  bk.  ii.  ch.  1) 
“the  humility  of  the  feet.”  And  so  they  used  to  wash  off  the 
stains  contracted  by  their  bare  feet.  This  custom  spread  from  the 
Church  of  Milan  to  other  churches  (see  S.  Augustine,  Epp.  118, 
1 19).  Palladius,  too,  in  his  Lauriaca , ch.  73,  tells  how  Serapion 
the  Sindonite  converted  two  comic  actors,  washed  their  feet  and 
then  baptized  them  ; but  afterwards,  as  a great  many  persons  came 
to  think  that  this  washing  of  feet  was  sufficient  without  baptism,  it 
was  forbidden  by  the  Council  of  Eliberis,  ch.  48.  The  Church  of 
Milan,  however,  continued  the  usage.  Guisseppe  Visconti  treats 
at  length  of  this  subject  in  his  De  Ritibus  Baptism  (bk.  iii.  ch. 
17,  etseq.). 

Ver.  8. — “ Peter  says  to  Him , Thou  shalt  never  wash  my  feet.” 
Origin  accuses  Peter  of  headstrong  audacity  and  disobedience,  but 
S.  Augustine  (Tract.  56)  rightly  excuses  him,  inasmuch  as  this 
speech  of  his  showed  profound  faith,  reverence,  fear,  humility,  and 
love.  “ I ” (the  words  are  St.  Cyprian's  in  his  treatise  on  the  wash- 
ing of  the  feet),  “I  am  ready  to  die  with  Thee,  if  needs  be,  for 
this  I ought  to  do,  this  fate  I embrace.  For  Thee  I will  gladly 
present  my  neck  to  the  executioner ; but  my  God  and  my  Lord 
prostrate  at  my  feet,  this  I suffer  not,  this  I dare  not  endure.” 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XITT. 


52 

Jesus  answered  him , If  I wash  thee  not,  thou  hast  no  part  with 
Me.  First , S.  Augustine  takes  this  mystically.  Unless  I wash 
away  thy  venial  sins  by  penance  I will  not  give  thee  the  Eucharist, 
which  I am  about  to  institute,  neither  shalt  thou  enter  heaven,  for 
nothing  that  is  defiled  can  enter  there.  So,  too,  St.  Cyprian  in  his 
treatise  on  the  washing  of  feet.  Secondly , according  to  SS.  Chry- 
sostom and  Cyril : Unless  thou  receive  the  lesson  of  humility  which 
I give  thee  in  this  washing  of  feet,  thou  shalt  have  no  part  with  Me, 
for  only  the  humble  attain  to  the  grace  and  glory  of  God. 

Thirdly , according  to  the  letter:  If  thou,  O Peter,  persistest 

in  thy  disobedience,  thou  shalt  not  communicate  with  Me  in  the 
Eucharistic  table, — I will  give  thee  no  part  of  the  bread  that  is 
about  to  be  consecrated  into  My  body, — I will  not  have  thee  for 
My  familiar  friend  and  the  companion  of  My  sacred  table.  Christ 
threatens  Peter  with  the  loss  of  His  intimate  friendship  and  of  the 
Eucharist,  not  the  loss  of  His  grace  and  glory ; for  though  Peter 
was  loth  to  obey,  yet  this  arose  from  his  profound  humility  and 
reverence,  and  was,  therefore,  worthy  of  pardon.  Toletus  says: 
He  threatened  not  to  give  Peter  the  Eucharist  by  which  Christ 
was  to  abide  in  him  and  he  in  Christ ; for  it  was  chiefly  for  this 
that  He  washed  their  feet,  so  that  they  might  be  clean  and  fitly 
prepared  to  receive  Him  when  He  should  give  Himself  to  them 
and  be  really  united  to  them.  Peter  did  not  distinctly  understand 
what  Christ  said  at  the  time,  but  only  understood  that  he  was  to 
be  cut  off  from  Christ  and  have  nothing  in  common  with  Him 
unless  he  underwent  this  washing;  afterwards,  however,  he  com- 
prehended the  mystery.  There  is  a similar  expression  in  3 Kings 
xii.  16,  where  the  people,  exasperated  by  the  cruelty  of  Roboam, 
say,  “ What  part  have  we  in  David  ? or  what  inheritance  in  the 
son  of  Jesse  ?” 

S.  Basil,  in  his  “ Discourse  on  Sin,”  says,  “ For  this  reason  threats 
of  this  kind  were  held  out  by  Christ  against  Peter,  that  unless  he  had 
rectified  his  will  by  promptitude  and  quickening  of  obedience,  not 
those  wonderful  blessings  which  had  come  to  him  from  God,  not  his 
gifts,  not  the  promises  made  to  him,  not  even  that  declaration  of 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


nature  oe  true  obedience. 


S3 


such  and  so  great  a yearning  towards  the  Only-Begotten  Son  of 
God  the  Father,  would  have  served  him  to  expiate  his  actual  dis- 
obedience.” Hence  S.  Basil  draws  from  this  two  remarkable  rules  of 
conduct : — 44  He  that  opposes  himself  to  the  commands  of  God, 
even  though  he  do  so  with  a pious  and  friendly  intention,  such  an 
one  is  nevertheless  for  this  cause  estranged  from  the  Lord.”  And 
the  second  is  : — “ Whatever  is  said  by  the  Lord,  that  ought  we  to 
receive  with  all  the  fulness  of  our  heart.”  (Reg.  xii.  ch.  2.) 

Simon  Peter  says  to  Himy  Lordy  not  only  my  feet%  but  also  my  hands 
and  my  head \ Struck  by  the  threat  of  Christ  as  by  a thunderbolt, 
Peter  obeys,  and  offers  more  than  Christ  had  asked.  Hence  S. 
Basil  in  his  Shorter  Rules,  60th  Answer,  gives  a useful  rule : — 
44  Whatever  we  have  before  resolved  upon  beside  that  which  is  com- 
manded by  the  Lord  must  be  rescinded.  This  is  plainly  shown  in 
the  case  of  the  Apostle  Peter,  who  had  first  resolved  4 Thou  shalt 
never  wash  my  feet/  but  when  he  heard  the  Lord  say  positively, 

4 Unless  I wash  thee,  thou  shalt  have  no  part  with  Me/  straightway 
changed  his  mind  and  said,  * Lord,  not  only  my  feet,  but  also  my 
hands.’  ” 

Again,  in  the  233rd  Answer,  St  Basil  teaches  us  from  this  text 
that  obedience  is  to  be  preferred  to  all  the  other  virtues.  44  Peter,” 
he  says,  44  although  the  Lord  had  borne  him  witness  of  such  and  so 
great  meritorious  acts,  and  had  called  him  and  pronounced  him 
blessed  in  so  singular  a manner,  yet,  having  in  one  point  only 
seemed  to  turn  aside  from  obedience,  and  that  too  not  from  negli- 
gence or  pride,  but  from  reverence  and  respect  to  his  Lord, — for  this 
and  this  only  is  it  said  to  him,  4 Unless  I wash  thy  feet,  thou  shalt 
have  no  part  with  Me.’  ” 

Ver.  10. — Jesus  says  to  him , He  that  has  been  washed  needeth  not 
but  to  wash  his  feety  but  is  clean  throughout.  Observe  that  Christ  here 
alludes  to  those  who  wash  themselves  in  the  baths  and  go  out 
washed  all  over,  but,  walking  barefoot  on  the  ground  soil  their  feet, 
and  therefore  afterwards  wash  them  only.  Again,  observe  that 
Christ,  as  His  wont  is,  here  rises  from  the  corporal  to  the  spiritual 
washing,  thus — He  that  has  been  spiritually  washed  by  baptism,  as 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


54 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIII. 


I,  O apostles,  have  washed  you,  or  he  who  has  been  washed  by 
contrition  and  penance,  such  an  one  is  washed  all  over  in  soul,  but 
needs  only  to  wash  his  feet,  that  is,  purge  frequently  by  contrition, 
bodily  austerities,  and  the  like  virtues,  the  inclinations  of  the  soul 
which  is  stained  by  contact  with  the  things  of  earth,  and  contact 
from  their  slight  impurities,  and  this  is  especially  needful  before 
receiving  the  Holy  Eucharist 

SS.  Augustine,  Bede,  Rupert,  and  S.  Bernard  in  his  Sermon  on 
the  Lord’s  Supper,  interpret  more  or  less  to  this  effect. 

So  Christ  by  this  washing  of  feet  purged  away  the  sins  of  Peter 
and  the  apostles,  especially  their  venial  sins ; for  by  means  of  this 
act  of  self-abasement  He  pricked  their  consciences  and  reminded 
them  of  that  inward  purification  that  must  be  made  in  the  soul  by 
contrition  by  means  of  which  venial  sins  are  expiated. 

Lastly,  S.  Augustine  in  his  108th  Letter  to  Seleucianus,  gathers 
with  some  probability  from  the  words  “ he  that  has  been  washed,” 
that  Peter  and  the  apostles  had  been  baptized  before  the  Eucharist ; 
both  because  no  one  is  qualified  to  receive  the  Eucharist  without 
having  been  baptized,  and  also  because  Christ  baptized  them  before 
His  death,  for  after  His  death  He  baptized  no  one,  and  it  is  clear 
that  they  must  all  have  been  baptized  either  by  Christ  Himself  or  by 
others  in  His  behalf.  The  expression  appears  to  be  rightly  appli- 
cable to  the  washing  which  takes  place  in  baptism. 

And  ye  are  clean , but  not  all  Christ  secretly  strives  to  provoke 
Judas  to  think  better  of  his  plot  of  wicked  treason;  still  He  would  not 
mention  him  by  name,  lest  He  should  bring  him  into  bad  odour,  and 
the  apostles  should  rise  up  against  him  as  a traitor,  and  ill-use  him. 

Ver.  n. — For  He  knciu  who  it  was  that  should  betray  Him; 
wherefore  He  said , Ye  are  not  all  clean . From  this  S.  Augustine 
gathers  that  Judas  was  then  present,  and  had  been  washed  by  Christ, 
and  that  he  received  the  Blessed  Sacrament — (Bk  ii.  contra 
Petil.  ch.  22.)  S.  Cyprian,  however,  in  his  treatise  on  the  Washing 
of  Feet,  says  that  Judas  was  not  present  at  the  washing,  nor,  conse- 
quently, at  the  Eucharist. 

Ver.  13. — Ye  call  Me  'Master'  and  ‘ Lord / and  ye  speak  rightly , 


Digitized  by  V boogie 


CHRIST  TAUGHT  BY  EXAMPLE.  55 

for  so  I am.  Christ  was  Master  and  Lord  of  all  men  and  of  the 
whole  world,  not  only  as  God  but  as  man,  and  not  only  taught 
externally  by  speaking,  as  masters  commonly  do,  but  illuminated 
minds  interiorly,  and  impelled  the  will  whithersoever  He  would 
See  Matt.  xxii.  io. 

Ver.  15. — I have  given  you  an  example,  that  as  I have  done  so  ye 
may  do  also — not  unto  Me,  seeing  that  I am  even  now  going  to 
death,  but  to  others,  your  neighbours,  when  necessity  or  kindness 
shall  require.  For,  as  St.  Gregory  says  in  his  preface  to  his  books 
of  Dialogues,  “ Examples  stir  us  up  to  the  love  of  our  heavenly 
country  more  than  preaching.”  It  was  thus  that  Jesus  began  first 
to  do  and  then  to  teach  (Acts  i.  1),  and  taught  more  by  deed  than  by 
word.  Hence  S.  Basil  teaches  that  he  who  bears  rule  must  first 
do  those  things  which  he  teaches  his  subjects  to  do,  and  that  he 
ought  to  excel  his  subjects  in  humility  as  he  does  in  dignity.  Christ 
foresaw  that  the  apostles  would  soon  be  wrangling  in  their  pride  as 
to  who  should  be  the  greater,  so  He  put  before  them  this  example  of 
humility  to  break  down  and  suppress  their  ambition;  and  in  the 
event  He  did  if  not  crush  at  least  break  it. 

Ver.  16. — Verily , verily  I say  to  you,  The  slave  is  not  greater  than 
his  Lord,  nor  the  messenger  than  He  that  sent  him.  Foreseeing  the 
contention  about  the  chief  place  which  would  soon  follow,  Christ 
insists  on  the  humility  which  He  is  inculcating  on  His  apostles. 

Ver.  17. — If  ye  know  these  things , blessed  shall  ye  be  if  ye  do  them. 
If  you  know  these  things — and  who  is  ignorant  that  a master  is 
greater  than  his  slave  ? — you  shall  be  blessed  if,  as  you  know  them, 
you  also  act  up  to  your  knowledge  in  practice.  Blessed  in  hope, 
though  not  yet  in  actuality  ; — blessed  ye  shall  be  after  death  if  until 
then  ye  continue  to  do  these  things,  and  persevere  in  following  Me, 
as  I know  that  ye  all  will  persevere  excepting  only  Judas.  And  so, 
to  indicate  this  exception,  He  adds, 

Ver.  18. — 1 speak  not  of  you  all,  because  I know  that  Judas  will 
not  do  these  things  which  I have  said.  I know  whom  1 have  chosen, 
S.  Augustine  (Tract.  59)  Aplains  this  with  reference  to  the  eternal 
predestination  and  election  to  glory  by  God  : — I speak  not  of  all, 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


5« 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIU. 


but  of  those  only  whom  I have  chosen  to  glory,  and  Judas  I have 
not  chosen.  This,  however,  seems  rather  harsh,  both  because  the 
whole  blame  must  be  laid  upon  Judas  and  not  upon  Christ,  and 
His  election  from  which  He  excluded  Judas,  and  in  the  next 
verse  Christ  lays  the  blame  on  Judas ; and  then  again  because 
Christ,  when  He  speaks  of  the  eternal  election  and  predestination 
of  God,  is  not  wont  to  attribute  it  to  Himself  but  to  the  Father, 
for  it  is  a primary  function  of  Providence,  which  is  the  attribute  of 
the  Father.  Christ  therefore  is  here  speaking  of  His  temporal  elec- 
tion, by  which  He,  as  man,  chose  twelve  apostles  (see  Luke  vi.), 
and  Judas  himself  among  the  number.  This  is  the  view  of  Toletus 
and  Maldonatus. 

I know  and  have  known  whom  and  what  manner  of  men  1 have 
elected  to  be  apostles , who  will  be  worthy , and  who  will  not , who  will 
persevere, , arid  therefore  be  blessed , and  who  will  not ; I know  those 
who  will  do  these  things  which  I have  said , and  who  will  not , as  I 
know  and  have  known , that  Judas  being  chosen  by  Me>  would  not  do 
these  things , but  would  be  My  betrayer.  Wherefore  I did  not  choose 
him  in  ignorance , nay  rather  I foreknew  and  foresaw  that  he  would 
betray  Me}  yet  did  I choose  him  to  use  his  malice  for  the  common  good , 
that  through  him  My  Passion  might  be  fulfilled , and  through  it  the 
salvation  and  redemption  of  men . Wherefore  He  adds, — But  that 
the  Scripture  may  be  fulfilled ; He  that  eateth  bread  with  Me  shall 
lift  up  his  heel  against  Me.  I knew  that  Judas  would  be  My  betrayer , 
yet  I elected  him  an  Apostle , that  through  him  the  Scripture  which 
foretold  My  Passion  and  its  manner , might  be  fulfilled , for  it  foretold 
that  it  should  be  begun  by  the  treachery  of  My  familiar  friend , of  one  of 
Mine  own  household \ of Judas  who  has  abused  My  friendship  and fami- 
liarity in  order  to  betray  Me.  And  I have  been  willing  to  allow  this, 
that  from  his  wickedness  I may  elicit  an  infinite  good — the  salva- 
tion, namely,  of  the  world — just  as  I permitted  the  fall  of  Lucifer 
and  of  Adam,  to  draw  from  thence  the  Incarnation  of  Christ 

Lift  up  his  heel . He  is  quoting  Ps.  xl.  9,  where  the  Septuagint 
translate  “made  great  upon  Me  his  tripping  up,”  and  S.  Jerome, 
“lifted  up  against  me  the  sole  of  his  foot,”  that  is,  tried  to  deceive, 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


s; 


CHRISTAS  FOREKNOWLEDGE. 

trip  up,  betray,  and  bring  Me  to  ruin ; nay,  he  did  indeed  trip  Me 
up  by  his  deceit,  caused  Me  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Jews,  and 
brought  Me  to  My  Cross  and  death.  David  is  speaking  literally  of 
Achitophel,  who  betrayed  him  to  his  son  Absalom,  but  mystically 
of  Judas,  the  betrayer  of  Christ,  of  whom  Achitophel  was  a type  as 
David  was  of  Christ 

Ver.  19. — I say  to  you  at  once,  before  it  come  to  pass , that  when 
it  come  to  pass  ye  may  believe  that  I am.  Now , in  the  Greek, 
a*’  agn,  which  may  be  translated  from  now  or  from  this  time,  as  in 
the  Syriac  Version,  or,  as  here,  straightway , forthwith,  indicating 
the  treachery  of  Judas  to  be  near  at  hand.  A few  hours  hence 
Judas  shall  betray  Me,  and  therefore  I foretell  it  to  you,  that  when 
you  see  Me  betrayed,  seized,  and  killed,  you  may  not  be  disturbed, 
but  may  believe— persevere  in  My  Faith,  that  I am — the  Messiah, 
the  Son  of  God,  freely  offering  Myself  to  death  for  the  redemption 
of  mankind.  I foretell  all  these  things  to  you  that  you  may  believe 
that  I know  them  all  beforehand  and  could  withdraw  Myself  from 
danger,  but  that  I will  not,  but  wish  to  suffer  for  the  salvation  of 
the  world.  Then,  too,  shall  you  see  that  I said  truly,  “ Ye  are  not 
all  clean  ” — that  Judas  is  unclean  and  wicked,  and  therefore  to  be 
reprobated  and  condemned,  when  you  see  him  for  the  enormity  of 
his  crime  strangle  himself  with  a cord.  Let,  therefore,  this  predic- 
tion of  Mine,  coupled  with  the  occurrence  of  the  thing  predicted, 
make  you  firm  and  strong  in  My  faith  when  you  are  on  the  point 
of  tottering.  So  Cyril. 

Ver.  20. — Verily , verily  I say  to  you,  that  He  that  receives  him 
whom  1 have  sent,  receives  Me;  and  he  that  receives  Me  receives  Him 
that  sent  Me.  It  is  not  clear  how  these  words  are  connected  with 
those  which  precede.  First  Chrysostom  (Horn.  21),  and  Theophy- 
lact  after  him,  refer  them  to  the  passion  and  cross  of  Christ,  as 
though  He  were  encouraging  the  apostles  to  imitate  it.  In  other 
words : Fear  not  the  persecutions,  death,  and  crosses  which  you 
shall  suffer  in  preaching  My  faith,  for  in  this  you  will  be  following 
Me, — suffering  as  My  ambassadors,  sent  by  Me  and  therefore  by 
God  the  Father.  Wherefore  this  suffering  shall  not  bring  ignominy 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


5« 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIII. 


on  you,  but  glory.  There  is,  however,  no  reference  here  to  the 
sufferings  of  the  apostles,  but  to  their  reception  by  the  world. 

Then  again  Cyril  (bk.  ix.  ch.  12)  thinks  that  Christ  is  showing 
the  heinousness  of  Judas’  treachery  by  means  of  an  argument  from 
its  contrary,  thus — Just  as  he  who  receives  and  honours  one  sent 
by  Me  receives  and  honours  Me,  so,  too,  he  who  rejects  him  that  I 
send  offers  a grievous  insult  not  only  to  Me,  but  also  to  God  who 
sent  Me.  Here,  however,  we  must  supply  a great  many  things 
which  Christ  did  not  say. 

Gaetano,  Jansen ius,  and  Ribera,  with  more  probability,  hold  that 
Christ  wished,  at  the  close  of  His  discourse  on  the  washing  of  feet, 
to  make  some  additional  remarks  by  way  of  exhorting  all  the  faith- 
ful to  receive  and  treat  with  kindness  the  apostles  sent  to  them, 
just  as  He  had  previously  exhorted  the  apostles  to  be  kind  to  the 
faithful.  In  this  way  He  consoles  the  apostles  too,  whom  He 
had  bidden  labour  in  offices  of  charity  for  the  good  of  all 
(Chrysostom,  Homily  71.) 

Lastly,  Toletus  thinks  that  this  is  connected  with  the  example 
given  in  the  washing  of  feet  by  Christ,  in  order  that  the  apostles 
and  the  faithful  may  not  excuse  themselves  from  following  it  on 
the  score  that  such  an  act  lowers  a man.  For  Christ  Himself 
practised  it,  and  in  so  doing  rendered  it  honourable  and  noble. 
The  meaning  then  is:  He  who  entertains  guests  who  are  of  the 
faith,  especially  apostles,  and  washes  their  feet,  as  it  were  receives 
Me  who  sent  them,  but  he  that  receives  Me  receives  also  the  Father 
who  sent  Me. 

Christ,  then,  here  teaches  that  offices  of  humility,  such  as  the 
washing  of  feet,  must  be  undertaken  even  by  apostles  and  pre- 
lates, and  not  refused  by  them  on  the  score  of  the  dignity  of  their 
station,  for  by  these  works  they  shall  become  honourable  as  true 
imitators  of  Christ  and  His  genuinely  accredited  agents.  It  was 
for  this  that  St  Francis  Xavier  when,  on  his  voyage  to  India,  he 
used  to  make  the  beds  of  the  sick  people,  cook  their  food,  and 
give  them  their  medicine,  hearing  the  complaint  made  that  such 
degrading  occupations  were  not  becoming  to  an  Apostolic  Legate 


Digitized  by  Google 


Example  of  s.  Francis  xavier. 


59 


as  he  was,  answered  that  they  were  becoming  to  a disciple  and 
apostle  of  Christ,  since  Christ  Himself  underwent,  and,  as  it  were, 
ennobled  them.  For  in  the  school  of  Christ  humility  alone 
ennobles  and  exalts,  because  it  makes  us  like  Christ  our  God  and 
Lord.  So  says  Tursellinus  in  his  life  of  this  Saint. 

S.  Charles  Borromeo  would,  on  an  occasion  of  public  supplication, 
ga  with  his  feet  bare,  a halter  tied  round  his  neck,  carrying  a cross. 
He  used  to  discharge  servile  functions  towards  the  poor,^ninister 
to  those  who  were  stricken  with  the  plague,  and  fulfil  every  menial 
office ; yet  did  he  not  by  so  doing  derogate  from  his  dignity  as  an 
Archbishop  and  a Cardinal,  but  rather  enhanced  it,  and  earned  the 
name  of  “ the  Holy  Cardinal.”  For  as  a carbuncle  set  in  a gold 
ring  increases  its  beauty,  so  does  humility  shed  a lustre  upon  the 
insignia  of  high  station. 

Ver.  21. — When  He  had  said  these  things , Jesus  was  troubled  in 
spirit , and  testified  (openly  and  plainly),  saying , Verify,  I say  unto 
you,  that  one  of  you  will  betray  Me.  In  the  Syriac,  “ These  things 
said  Jeschua,  and  groaned  in  spirit,  and  testified  and  said,  Amin, 
amin,  I say  to  you,”  x.r.A.  In  the  Arabic  Version  “was  moved  in 
spirit.”  This  emotion,  then,  was  an  immense  grief  and  indignation 
at  the  crime  of  Judas.  Christ  was  pained  in  the  innermost  feelings 
of  His  soul,  and  groaned  in  spirit  for  the  enormity  of  this  crime  as 
well  as  for  the  perdition  of  Judas.  And  this  sorrow  he  did  not 
suffer  involuntarily,  but  admitted  it  of  His  free  will,  and  took  it 
upon  Him  at  this  point  of  His  own  accord,  as  He  did  at  the  death 
of  Lazarus.  See  commentary  on  ch.  xi.  ver.  33. 

The  question  arises  here,  Did  this  prediction  of  Christ  take  place 
before  or  after  the  institution  of  the  Eucharist?  John  omits  all 
mention  of  that  event,  it  having  been  narrated  fully  by  the  other 
Evangelists.  Matthew  and  Mark  put  the  prediction  before  the 
institution  of  the  Eucharist  in  order  of  time,  but  Luke  puts  it  after. 

There  are  three  probable  opinions  on  this  point.  The  first  is 
that  of  Jansenius  and  Francis  Lucas,  who  think  that  Christ  predicted 
the  treason  of  Judas  after  the  Eucharist,  as  Luke  has  it,  and  that 
Matthew  and  Mark,  in  making  it  come  before,  anticipate  inten- 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


6o 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIII. 


tionally.  The  reason  for  this  view  is  that  if  Christ  had  predicted 
the  treason  of  Judas  before  the  institution  of  the  Eucharist,  He  would 
have  disturbed  the  minds  of  the  apostles,  moved  them  to  anger, 
and  rendered  their  dispositions  for  its  reception  less  collected  than 
would  have  been  fitting.  But  this  is  not  conclusive.  For  Christ 
before  the  Eucharist  foretold  His  passion  and  death,  and  this  dis- 
turbed the  apostles  far  more  : and  soon  after  the  Eucharist— as  these 
interpreters  themselves  admit — He  foretold  the  treason  of  Judas, 
and  this  disturbed  them  then,  so  that  they  did  not  duly  dispose 
themselves  for  that  recollection  which  is  proper  after  Communion. 
Then  again  this  prediction  would,  before  the  Eucharist,  have  had 
the  force  of  deterring  Judas  from  his  crime,  as  well  as  producing 
compunction  in  the  hearts  of  the  apostles  and  making  them  all 
careful  to  examine  each  one  his  own  conscience,  lest  Christ  should 
there  find  anything  to  bring  to  light  and  complain  of,  as  He  did  the 
crime  of  Judas. 

The  second  opinion  is  that  of  Baronius  (Anno  Dni.  34,  ch.  58). 
He  thinks  that  Christ  made  this  prediction  before  the  institution  of 
the  Eucharist,  as  Matthew  and  Mark  have  it  Baronius,  then,  is  of 
opinion  that  the  events  took  place  in  the  order  given  by  John, 
namely,  that  after  the  washing  of  the  feet,  Jesus  spoke  of  His 
betrayal,  that  it  was  then  that  He  gave  John  the  sign  of  the  morsel 
dipped  in  the  dish,  but  that,  as  for  Judas  having  gone  out  immediately 
after  he  had  taken  the  morsel,  we  are  not  to  take  the  phrase  as 
meaning  without  any  delay  in  point  of  time,  but  that,  driven  on  by  a 
kind  of  madness,  he  did  not  wait  for  the  lengthy  discourse  which 
our  Lord  made  after  the  Supper.  For  S.  Luke  clearly  bears  witness 
that  Judas  stayed  with  the  others  until  the  end  of  the  Communion ; 
and  after  this,  according  to  the  Jewish  ceremonial,  it  would  seem 
that  nothing  was  left  on  the  table  in  which  the  morsel  of  bread 
could  have  been  dipped,  so,  too,  it  seems  impossible  to  say  that  this 
morsel  of  bread  was  the  Eucharist  But  then  Judas,  after  taking 
the  morsel,  did  go  out  immediately , nay,  that  very  moment  according 
to  the  Syriac.  He  did  not,  then,  wait  for  the  lengthy  Communion  of 
the  apostles,  if  that  took  place  after  the  incident  of  the  morsel. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  SOP  GIVEN  TO  JUDAS. 


61 


Hence  it  is  with  greater  likelihood  that  other  upholders  of  this  view 
maintain  that  the  morsel  given  to  Judas  by  Christ  was  itself  the 
Eucharist ; and  he,  driven,  as  it  were,  to  madness  by  the  devil  when 
he  had  received  it  unworthily,  straightway  went  forth  to  carry  out 
the  crime  he  was  meditating.  Moreover,  during  and  after  the  insti- 
tution of  the  Eucharist  Christ  reclined  at  the  table,  and  there,  as 
Luke  has  it,  foretold  the  treason  of  Judas.  It  is,  therefore,  alto- 
gether probable  that  the  table  had  not  yet  been  removed,  but  that 
on  it  there  remained  bread  and  fragments  of  food  out  of  which  Christ 
could  take  the  bread  which  He  dipped  and  gave  to  Judas. 

The  third  opinion,  therefore,  holding  a middle  place  between  the 
two  former,  seems  to  be  the  more  correct — namely,  that  Christ  both 
foretold  His  betrayal  by  Judas  before  the  Eucharist,  and  repeated 
the  prediction  after  it ; and  this  both  because  He  felt  the  atrocity 
of  the  crime,  and  was,  as  John  here  says,  disturbed  in  spirit  by  it, 
again,  that  He  might  place  his  own  wickedness  before  Judas,  show 
him  that  He  knew  of  it,  and  deter  him  from  carrying  it  out,  and 
also  to  prepare  and  fortify  the  minds  of  the  Apostles,  that  when 
they  should  soon  after  see  the  actual  betrayal  and  the  capture  of 
Jesus  they  might  not  be  shocked,  but  might  persevere  with  con- 
stancy in  His  faith.  In  this  way  we  best  reconcile  Matthew  and 
Mark  with  Luke.  This  is  the  expressed  view  of  S.  Augustine 
(De  Consensu  Evang ;,  bk.  iii.  ch.  i),  of  Euthymius,  and  of 
Toletus,  who  say  that  the  order  of  events  was  as  follows.  The 
Supper  of  the  Paschal  Lamb  having  been  finished,  and  the  ordinary 
Supper  begun,  Christ,  while  they  were  supping,  arose  and  washed 
the  feet  of  His  disciples ; then,  reclining  once  more,  He  said  all 
these  things  which  John  narrates ; being  troubled  in  spirit  He 
speaks  of  His  betrayer,  and  they  all  ask,  one  by  one,  “ Is  it  I ? ” 
Judas  receiving  the  answer,  “Thou  hast  said.” 

Next  He  institutes  the  Eucharist,  and  this  being  done,  and  the 
Mystery  having  been  celebrated,  He  again  speaks  of  His  betrayer, 
as  Luke  relates,  ch.  xxii.  “Nevertheless,”  He  says,  “behold,  the 
hand  of  him  that  betrayeth  Me  is  with  Me  at  table,”  &c.  Then 
Peter  asks  John,  “Who  is  it  of  whom  He  speaks?”  and  John  ask- 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


62 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIII. 


ing  Jesus,  receives  the  answer,  “ He  to  whom  I shall  offer  the  bread 
when  I have  dipped  it.”  And  after  this  morsel  Satan  entered  into 
Judas,  and  he  went  away ; and  when  he  went  away,  and  the  Supper 
was  quite  finished,  Christ  made  to  His  disciples  the  wonderful 
discourse  shortly  after  recorded  by  John. 

Ver.  22. — Therefore  the  disciples  began  to  look  at  one  another , doubt- 
ing of  whom  He  was  speaking,  and  asking,  too,  one  by  one,  “ Lord, 
is  it  I ? ” For,  as  Chrysostom  says,  “ Because  He  did  not  speak  of 
His  betrayer  by  name,  He  brought  fear  upon  all,  and,  though  con- 
scious to  themselves  of  nothing  evil,  they  yet  believed  Christ  more 
than  their  own  thoughts.”  And,  as  Origen  says,  “ They,  as  being 
men,  remembered  that  the  feelings  even  of  enthusiasts  are  liable  to 
change.” 

Ver.  23 — There  was  then  reclining  on  the  bosom  of  Jesus  one  of 
His  disciples , whom  Jesus  loved , namely,  John  himself.  The 
Apostles,  desiring  to  know  by  name  who  was  to  be  the  traitor, 
Peter,  more  eager  and  fervent  than  the  rest,  hints  to  John,  who  is 
reclining  on  the  bosom  of  Jesus,  to  inquire  of  Jesus,  as  John  here 
relates,  and  this  is  the  force  of  the  “then.”  John  being  dearer 
to  Jesus  and  closer  to  Him,  inasmuch  as  he  was  reclining  on  His 
bosom,  therefore,  for  this  reason,  Peter  hints  to  him  to  inquire  of 
Jesus  his  beloved  the  name  of  the  traitor.  Moreover,  John  is  said 
to  have  reclined  on  the  bosom  of  Jesus  because  the  ancients  used 
not  to  sit  at  table,  but  reclined  by  twos  or  threes  on  the  several 
couches  placed  before  the  tables,  so  that,  leaning  on  the  lower  part 
of  the  right  arm,  they  lay  rather  than  sat  at  table  ; and  so  it  came 
to  pass  that  the  second  person  coming  next  to  the  first  on  his  left 
hand  would  seem  as  it  were  to  lie  upon  his  bosom. 

Whom  Jesus  loved — not  only  with  the  love  of  human  friendship, 
but  also  with  the  love  of  charity,  for  the  sake  of  virginity  and  purity, 
his  modesty  and  meekness,  and  the  sweet  and  holy  disposition  by 
which  he  excelled  all  the  others.  So  say  Cyril,  Chrysostom,  Theo- 
phylact,  Euthymius,  and  St.  Jerome  in  his  letter  to  Heliodorus. 
Still  it  does  not  follow  from  this  that  John  was  absolutely  holier 
than  all  the  other  apostles ; Peter  may  have  been  more  ardent  in 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


S.  PETER  MAKES  SIGNS  TO  S.  JOHN. 


63 


charity  than  he,  and  therefore  holier  than  John.  For  sanctity 
consists  chiefly  in  the  love  of  God,  which  is  its  measure.  Moreover, 
that  John  was  reclining  on  the  bosom  of  Jesus  was  not  only  a mark 
of  His  love  for  him  at  the  time,  but  also  a sign  of  what  was  to  be, 
“ That  he  might  take  from  thence,”  says  Bede,  “ that  voice  unheard 
through  all  ages  which  he  was  afterwards  to  send  forth  to  the 
world.” 

Ver.  24. — Simon  Peter , therefore,  gave  him  a sign , and  said  to  him , 
Who  is  it  of  whom  He  speaks  t — Hence  it  is  plain  that  Peter  not 
only  gave  a sign  to  John  by  winking  and  nodding,  as  S.  Augustine 
would  have  it,  but  also  spoke  to  him  quietly,  as  John  here  relates. 
Such  is  the  opinion  of  Origen,  Chrysostom,  and  Cyril.  Peter  asks 
this  not  as  Prince  of  the  Apostles  (though  Cyril  takes  this  view), 
nor  as  though  fearing  for  himself  lest  he  should  be  the  traitor,  as 
Chrysostom  thinks,  but  out  of  his  zeal,  that  he  might  avert  so 
enormous  a crime  and  prevent  the  betrayal  of  Christ,  just  as  in  the 
garden  he  wished  to  prevent  His  capture  by  cutting  off  the  right  ear 
of  Malchus. 

Verses  25,  26. — So  when  he  had  reclined  upon  the  breast  of  fesus9 
x.r. A.  John  seems  to  have  moved  towards  Peter,  who  was  making 
signs  to  him,  and  so  to  have  moved  away  a little  from  the  bosom 
of  Jesus  in  order  to  hear  what  Peter  had  to  say ; and  having  heard, 
he  seems  to  have  reoccupied  his  former  position  to  ask  of  Jesus 
what  Peter  had  suggested  to  him. 

The  bread  I have  dipped. — Observe  that  Judas  was  present  at  the 
celebration  of  the  Passover,  and  also  of  the  Eucharist ; and  received 
the  latter  together  with  the  other  Apostles,  as  SS.  Augustine,  Chrysos- 
tom, Cyril,  and  others  show.  Indeed  some  have  thought  that  this  bread 
which  He  had  dipped  was  the  Eucharist,  but  erroneously ; for  Christ 
did  not  consecrate  bread  which  He  had  dipped,  but  dry  bread,  and 
likewise  pure  wine  and  unmixed  (with  bread).  Christ,  after  the  Holy 
Communion,  took  from  the  table  a morsel  of  the  bread  that  remained, 
dipped  it  into  some  little  dainty  sauce  that  remained  on  the  table,  for 
it  is  not  fitting  that  at  a banquet  dry  bread  should  be  given  to  a 
guest  by  the  host,  and  gave  it  to  Judas,  that  by  this  sign  He  might 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


6 4 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIII. 


indicate  him  to  John  as  the  traitor.  The  other  apostles  did  not 
hear  the  words  of  Christ  to  John  about  this  way  of  pointing -out  the 
traitor,  He  having  spoken  quietly  to  John  in  his  ear. 

Moreover,  Christ  pointed  him  out  by  this  sign  with  peculiar  fitness, 
bread  which  we  eat  at  table  being  a sign  of  peace  and  friendship, 
so  that  Christ  showed  by  it,  not  only  who  the  traitor  was,  but  also  the 
nature  and  mode  of  his  treachery,  for  Judas  was  to  betray  Him  by 
a similar  sign  of  friendship,  a kiss. 

Mystically  this  pipping  of  the  bread  denoted  the  falseness  and 
fraud  that  was  in  the  soul  of  Judas,  says  St.  Augustine.  Again  St 
Cyril  and  Augustine  say  that  Judas  was  pointed  out  by  Christ  by 
the  morsel  of  bread  that  the  words  of  Ps.  xli.  might  be  fulfilled — 
“ He  that  eateth  bread  with  me  hath  lifted  his  heel  against  me.” 
Indeed  Chrysostom  says  that  by  this  very  act  Christ  here  upbraided 
Judas  with  this,  as  if  He  had  said,  How  is  it,  Judas,  that  thou, 
a companion  of  My  table,  art  not  ashamed  to  betray  Me?  Judas, 
then,  having  received  the  morsel  from  Christ,  feeling  by  his  own 
evil  conscience,  and  by  this  sign,  that  he  was  a marked  man, 
persisted  shamelessly  and  obstinately  in  his  intention  of  betraying 
Christ.  For  seeing  himself  found  out  and  disgraced,  as  it  were 
beside  himself  and  infuriated,  he  went  forth  at  the  devil's  prompting 
to  finish  his  crime,  going  to  the  chief  priests  to  ask  them  for  guards 
who,  with  him  for  their  leader  and  guide,  should  seize  Jesus. 

Though  Matthew  puts  these  words  and  Christ's  answer  before 
the  Eucharist,  so  that  S.  Augustine  (De  Consensu  Evang . bk.  iii. 
ch.  1)  thinks  that  they  were  spoken  before  it,  yet  from  the  words  of 
Luke  and  John  it  is  plain  that  they  were  spoken  after  the  Eucharist. 
For  it  is  altogether  likely  that  Judas,  when  he  heard  Christ;s 
answer,  Thou  hast  said , straightway  went  out  embarrassed  and 
indignant.  Immediately,  then,  after  receiving  the  morsel  he  asked, 
Master • is  it  11  received  the  answer,  Thou  hast  said , and  then  went 
out  at  once,  covered  with  shame  and  indignation. 

Ver.  27. — And  after  the  morsel  Satan  entered  into  him,  urging 
and  impelling  him  to  avenge  this  his  disgrace, — to  betray  to  the 
Jews  Christ  who  had  betrayed  his  villainy.  Satan,  who  had  before 


“ Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


CAUSES  OF  JUDAS*  FALL. 


65 


entered  into  Judas  for  the  plotting  of  the  betrayal,  as  was  said  in 
verse  2,  here  again  entered  into  him  for  its  accomplishment ; both 
because  Jifdas,  being  already  called  by  Christ  and  the  apostles 
a traitor,  dared  remain  among  them  no  longer  lest  he  should  be 
ill-treated  by  them,  and  also  because  the  hour  proper  for  the 
betrayal,  and  appointed  first  by  Judas,  was  near  at  hand — that  hour, 
namely,  when  he  knew  that  Christ  would,  after  His  wont,  go  out  to 
pray  on  Mount  Olivet,  where  He  could  easily  seized*  Wherefore 
there  was  no  need  for  John  to  point  out  Judas  to  Peter  when  Christ 
pointed  out  the  traitor  to  him,  for  Judas  soon  betrayed  himself  both 
by  his  question  and  by  his  departure. 

So  Satan  entered  into  Judas  to  take  complete  possession  of  him, 
and  that  with  certainty  and  with  a strong  hold,  so  that  he  brought 
him  soon  to  the  halter.  Not  that  the  morsel  given  him  by  Christ 
put  the  devil  into  him,  for  this  was  a sign  of  Christ’s  love  by  which 
He  wanted  to  win  the  heart  of  Judas  to  love  Him  in  return,  but 
that  Judas,  ungrateful  for  this  love  of  Christ,  took  it  in  bad  part, 
thinking  that  Christ  was  giving  him  the  morsel  out  of  hatred  and 
a desire  to  injure  him  and  make  his  crime  known  to  the  apostles. 

Wherefore,  bidding  farewell  to  the  apostolate  of  Christ,  he  went 
away  to  the  household  and  the  bondage  of  Satan  and  of  the  Jews 
as  a deserter  and  apostate.  So  S.  Chrysostom,  S.  Augustine,  and 
Cyril,  who  observes  that  a kindness  hurts  those  who  are  ungrateful 
not  of  itself,  but  through  their  fault  and  ingratitude.  S.  Ambrose 
( De  Cain  et  Abel \ bk.  ii.  ch.  4)  says — “When  Satan  put  him- 
self into  the  heart  of  Judas,  Christ  went  away  from  him,  and  in  that 
moment  when  he  received  the  former  he  lost  the  latter.” 

The  devil  entered  into  Judas  for  three  reasons.  First,  for  his 
ingratitude,  says  S.  Augustine ; for  Christ  having  discharged  all  the 
offices  of  love  towards  him,  and  he  not  being  moved  even  by  these, 
was  left  to  be  fully  possessed  by  the  devil.  Then  again,  because 
the  devil  knew  from  the  words  of  the  Lord  and  from  outward  signs 
that  he  was  stubborn  in  his  evil  will,  and  given  over  by  the  Lord, 
says  Chrysostom  (Homily  71).  Thirdly,  because  Judas  himself 

understood  that  he  was  now  found  out,  and,  as  it  were,  separated 
vol.  v.  e 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


66 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIII. 


from  the  disciples  and  from  their  Master ; so  he  became  hardened 
in  evil,  and,  as  if  in  desperation,  gave  himself  over  entirely  to  the  devil; 
and  so  it  was  that  he  went  out,  unable  to  bear  the  looks  of  his  Lord 
and  of  the  disciples,  or,  says  Euthymius,  following  S.  Chrysostom, 
fearing  lest  he  should  be  torn  to  pieces  by  them.  So  Ribera. 

Notice  here  in  the  case  of  Judas  how  a man  who  deserts  Christ 
is  palpably  deserted  by  Christ,  and  when  deserted  is  attacked  by 
Satan — possessed  by  him,  and,  when  possessed,  hurried  into  every 
crime,  and  then  into  the  abyss.  Just  as  Judas  from  an  apostle 
became  a devil,  so  Lucifer  from  the  fairest  of  angels  became  the 
darkest  of  evil  spirits, — as  the  sourest  vinegar  is  made  from  the 
sweetest  wine,  and  the  heretic — Luther,  for  instance — nay,  the 
heresiarch,  is  made  from  the  monk. 

And  Jesus  said  to  him  ; What  thou  doesi,  do  more  quickly — more 
quickly , that  is  quickly , as  the  Syriac  translates  it ; the  comparative  is 
put  for  the  positive.  Christ  is  not  precipitating  the  treason  of 
Judas,  but  He  permits  it  He  says  as  it  were  : Think  not  that  thy 
doings  are  hidden  from  Me  ; I know  that  thou  art  meditating 
treason.  He  did  not  tell  him  to  commit  the  crime,  says  S.  Augus- 
tine, but  He  foretold  it,  not  so  much  in  wrathful  desire  for  the 
destruction  of  the  villain,  as  in  haste  for  the  safety  of  the  faithful. 
He  permitted  it,  saying,  as  it  were  : Do  what  thou  hast  begun,  finish 
what  thou  didst  intend ; in  a thousand  ways  could  I hinder  thee, 
but  I will  not ; rather  do  I leave  thee  to  thy  free  wilL  Do  what 
thou  hast  planned  in  thy  heart. 

Thirdly,  S.  Chrysostom  says  they  are  words  of  reproach.  I know 
that  thou  art  working  great  evil  against  Me,  from  whom  thou  hast 
received  so  many  gifts ; are  these  the  injuries  thou  repayest  Me  for 
so  many  kindnesses?  But  do  what  thou  hast  to  do.  For  even 
though  I have  made  known  thy  crime,  yet  have  I not  done  so  as 
fearing  it,  nor  would  I wish  to  hinder  it ; for  if  I wished  I could  do 
so;  but  in  order  to  cast  before  thine  eyes  thy  malice  and  thy 
shamelessness,  and  to  reprove  thee. 

Fourthly,  they  are  the  words  of  a lofty  mind  that  despises  all  the 
machinations  of  Judas.  St.  Leo  (Serm.  y,  On  the  Passion)  says, 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


SATAN  ENTERS  INTO  JUDAS. 


67 


“ It  is  the  voice  of  one  who  commands  not  but  permits,  of  one  not 
fearing  but  prepared,  who,  holding  all  time  in  His  power,  showed 
that  He  allowed  no  delay  to  the  traitor,  and  that  He  so  followed 
out  the  will  of  the  Father  for  the  redemption  of  the  world,  as 
neither  to  prompt  nor  fear  the  crime  that  was  being  matured.” 

Fifthly,  they  are  the  words  of  one  excluding  Judas,  as  incorrig- 
ible, from  His  family  and  the  fellowship  of  the  apostles.  Since 
thou  wilt  sever  thyself  from  us,  I exclude  thee  from  My  table,  from 
My  house,  My  apostolate,  and  My  companionship ; get  thee  gone, 
then,  to  thine  own  Jews  and  to  Satan,  to  whom  thou  hast  sold  thy- 
self. So  S.  Ambrose  (De  Cain  et  Abel , bk.  ii.  ch.  4).  Cyril 
(bk.  ix.  ch.  17),  following  Origen,  interprets  in  a novel  fashion, 
taking  these  things  as  said  by  Christ  not  to  Judas  but  to  Satan, 
who  was  entering  into  Judas.  He  says  that,  “ Just  as  if  a mighty 
man  against  whom  some  one  advances  with  hostile  intent,  trusting 
in  his  own  might,  doubts  not  but  that  his  adversary  shall  fall,  and, 
with  loud  and  threatening  noise,  speaks  : What  thou  doest  do  quickly , 
that  thou  niayest  know  the  strength  of  my  right  hand.  Such  words 
we  would  not  call  so  much  the  words  of  one  in  haste  to  die,  as  of 
one  who  knew  before  that  his  adversary  must  fall.  So  our  Lord 
bids  the  devil  run  quickly  to  the  things  he  has  made  ready,  that 
being  conquered  and  bound  he  may  the  sooner  relieve  the  world 
of  his  tyranny.”  But  from  what  we  have  said  it  is  clear  that  this  was 
said  to  Judas  and  not  to  Satan,  as  the  Fathers  and  interpreters 
generally  hold. 

Ver.  28. — But  of  this , none  of  those  at  table  kneiu  why  He  said 
it , *.  r.  A.  For  though  they  knew  from  the  words  of  Christ  that 
Judas  was  to  be  His  betrayer,  yet  they  did  not  know  that  he  would 
betray  Him  that  very  night ; and  therefore  they  did  not  understand 
that  Christ,  when  He  said,  What  thou  doest , do  quickly , was  speaking 
of  His  betrayal,  but  interpreted  it  with  reference  to  the  purchase  of 
things  needful  for  the  celebration  of  the  Passover,  Judas  being  the 
steward  of  Christ  and  the  apostles. 

Ver.  30. — When , therefore , he  had  received  the  morsel , he  straight- 
way went  out.  Both  because  he  then  became  possessed  by  the  devil, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


68 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIII. 


and  also  because  Christ  by  the  foregoing  words  had  expelled  him 
from  His  household.  The  word  “ therefore ” refers  to  both  these 
reasons.  S.  Augustine  remarks  that,  the  unclean  one  going  forth, 
all  they  that  were  clean  remained  with  Him  that  cleanseth  them, 
like  the  wheat  when  the  tares  have  been  separated  from  it.  S.  Cyril 
observes  that  the  devil  impelled  Judas  to  go  forth  immediately  to 
betray  Christ,  lest,  by  the  virtue  of  the  Eucharist  which,  though 
unworthily  received,  was  pricking  his  conscience,  he  might  repent 
and  think  better  of  his  crime.  Origen  adds  further,  that  the  teaching 
of  Christ  was  so  efficacious  as  to  move  His  betrayer  afterwards  to 
say : I have  sinned  in  betraying  the  innocent  bloody  nay,  even  to  such 
sorrow,  that  unable  to  tolerate  life  he  hanged  himself,  “ showing  ” 
he  says,  “ how  great  was  the  power  of  the  teaching  of  Jesus  even  in 
a sinner,  a thief,  and  a traitor,  seeing  that  he  even  could  not  alto- 
gether set  at  nought  the  things  he  had  learnt  from  Jesus.”  Hence 
we  may  gather  that  it  is  good  to  bring  about  delays  in  the  way  of 
those  who  are  suffering  a strong  temptation  from  the  devil  to  commit 
some  sin  forthwith ; for  through  this  very  delay,  the  matter  being 
more  maturely  considered,  the  vileness,  the  evil  results,  and  penalties 
of  the  sin  come  to  be  seen,  and  deter  the  man  from  its  commission ; 
and  at  last  the  heat  of  the  temptation  abates  and  slackens  by  reason 
of  the  mere  delay. 

On  the  other  hand,  when  we  are  following  after  good  and 
virtuous  intentions,  as,  for  instance,  a resolution  to  enter  the  Priest- 
hood or  the  Religious  State,  there  is  need  of  haste,  lest  our  relatives, 
our  companions,  or  the  devil,  by  interposing  delays,  succeed  in 
frittering  away  the  whole  scheme.  Hear  what  S.  Chrysostom  says 
(Horn.  57),  “While  this  love  is  burning  in  thee,  betake  thee  straight- 
way to  the  angels  themselves  and  inflame  it  yet  more  exceedingly. 
Say  not,  I will  first  speak  to  my  relations,  and  set  my  affairs  in 
order;  for  such  delay  is  the  beginning  of  torpor.  The  disciple 
would  bury  his  father,  and  Christ  suffered  him  not  Why  so? 
Because  the  devil  is  eager  and  watchful  to  creep  into  the  soul,  and 
if  he  can  seize  but  a brief  delay  brings  thee  to  lukewarmness.”  S. 
Anselm  and  S.  Bernard  speak  in  the  same  sense. 


Digitized  by 


THE  NIGHT. 


69 


And  it  was  night.  John  adds  this,  first,  for  the  sake  of  historical 
completeness,  to  mark  the  time  when  Christ  was  betrayed  and  seized 
by  the  Jews ; secondly,  to  indicate  the  haste  of  the  devil,  who  drove 
on  Judas  late  at  night  to  go  and  look  for  the  guards  who  were  per- 
haps asleep;  and,  thirdly,  says  S.  Chrysostom  (Horn.  71),  “that  we 
may  appreciate  the  rashness  of  Judas  whom  the  unreasonableness  of 
the  hour  did  not  restrain.” 

Symbolically,  the  Gloss  says  that  the  night-time  is  in  keeping 
with  the  mystery,  for  he  that  went  out  was  a son  of  darkness  and 
did  the  works  of  darkness.  The  night  indicates  the  darkness  of 
mind  in  which  Judas  was,  says  S.  Ambrose  (De  Cain , bk.  ii.  ch.  4), 
also  the  impenitence  and  condemnation  to  the  darkness  of  hell,  to 
which  Judas  was  on  his  way.  S.  Gregory  (“  Morals,”  ii.  2),  “ By  the 
nature  of  the  time  the  end  of  the  action  is  expressed,  and  Judas, 
who  was  never  to  come  back  to  pardon,  is  recorded  to  have  gone 
forth  by  night.  ...  For  this  cause  it  is  said  to  the  wicked  rich  man : 
This  night  shall  thy  soul  be  required  of  thee.  His  soul  which  is 
being  carried  away  into  darkness,  is  mentioned  as  being  required  of 
him  not  by  day  but  by  night” 

Ver.  31. — When,  therefore , he  had  gone  forth , Jesus  said , Now  is 
the  Son  of  Man  glorified,  and  God  is  glorified  in  Him — “ is  glorified 
equivalent  to  “ is  soon  to  be  glorified f the  perfect  put  for  the  imme- 
diate future;  Judas  is  now  gone  forth  to  betray  Me,  therefore 
is  my  cross  and  death  nigh  at  hand,  and  so  far  is  it  from  bringing 
ignominy  on  Me  that*  on  the  contrary,  by  it  I am  to  be  supremely 
glorified.  For  in  it  shall  I be  recognised  as  not  only  man  and  the 
Son  of  man,  but  also  the  Son  of  God  and  God ; for  the  Divinity 
that  lieth  veiled  in  My  humanity  shall  be  recognised  by  the  darken- 
ing of  the  sun,  the  cleaving  asunder  of  rocks,  the  opening  of  sepul- 
chres, the  rising  up  of  the  dead,  and  the  quaking  of  all  the  earth, — 
all  these  things  shall  show  forth  that  God  suffereth  and  dieth  upon 
the  cross.  And  again  by  its  effects,  for  by  the  cross  will  I subjugate 
to  Myself  the  whole  world,  all  the  devils,  and  sin,  death  and  hell, 
as  the  God  and  Lord  of  all  things.  So  S.  Chrysostom,  Cyril,  and 
others.  And  here,  note  that  by  these  signs  God  and  the  Godhead 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


70 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIII. 


of  Christ  not  only  glorified  the  humanity  of  Christ  but  Itself  also ; 
for  in  them  was  made  manifest  the  infinite  goodness,  power,  wisdom, 
majesty,  and  glory  of  Chrises  Godhead. 

Ver.  32. — If  God  is  glorified  in  Him,  God  shall  also  glorify  Him 
in  Himself  and  shall  glorify  Him  straightway . If  that  is  because — 
because  Christ,  made  obedient  unto  the  death  of  the  cross,  hath  by 
this  His  obedience,  reverence,  and  sacrifice,  glorified  God  the  Father, 
therefore  shall  God  the  Father  in  turn  glorify  the  Son  in  Himself 
by  demonstrating  and  making  manifest  the  Divinity  that  is  hidden 
in  Him.  And  this  straightway — quickly,  for  on  the  third  day  He 
shall  raise  Him  up  revived,  and  glorious  in  His  death ; on  the  fortieth 
day  He  shall  cause  Him  to  ascend  in  triumph  into  Heaven ; and  on 
the  fiftieth  to  send  down  His  Holy  Spirit  upon  the  apostles.  By 
all  these  things  He  made  known  to  the  world  that  Jesus  is  not  only 
man  but  God,  and  the  Son  of  God.  So  Cyril  and  Chrysostom. 
Origen,  in  his  6th  Homily,  says  that  the  glorification  of  Christ  was 
twofold, — the  former  in  His  death,  by  which  He  was  glorified  in  the 
lowliness  of  His  mortality ; and  the  latter  in  His  resurrection,  by 
which  He  was  glorified  in  the  sublimity  of  His  immortality. 

Secondly,  S.  Hilary  (He  Trinitate , bk.  v.),  and  Toletus  following 
him,'  think  that  God  is  said  to  be  glorified  in  Christ , because  He 
showed  His  own  Divinity  in  His  death  and  resurrection ; proving 
Himself  God  and  the  Son  of  God  by  raising  Himself  from  death, 
ascending  into  heaven  by  His  own  power,  and  thence  sending 
down  the  Holy  Spirit  and  working  many  wonders  through  the 
apostles.  This  interpretation  is  called  for  by  the  expressions — in 
Him , in  Himself  The  Godhead  was  veiled  in  Christ  until  His 
death,  but  it  then  shone  out  and  thrust  itself  forth,  showing  Christ 
to  be  not  only  man,  but  also  the  Son  of  God,  inasmuch  as  He  raised 
Himself  from  death  by  virtue  of  His  own  Divinity.  Origen  says, 
“The  Son  is,  as  Paul  says,  the  brightness  of  the  Divine  glory,  from 
whence  come  its  splendours  upon  every  rational  creature ; for  only 
the  Son  is  capable  of  comprehending  all  the  brightness  of  the  Divine 
glory.”  The  words  “ in  Himself”  may  be  referred,  first,  to  “the  Son 
of  Man.”  God  glorified  the  Man  Christ,  by  showing  that  He,  as  man, 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  SAINTS  CALLED  LITTLE  ONES.  J I 

had  God  indwelling  in  Him,  and  the  Godhead  of  the  Word  ; and 
secondly,  to  “ God  ” — God  showing  that  the  Man  Christ  subsists  in 
the  Divine  Person  of  the  Word,  that  is,  in  God. 

Ver.  33. — My  little  children . Notice  the  tenderness  of  Christ’s 
feeling  of  love  towards  His  apostles  and  the  faithful.  He  says 
not  “ my  sons”  but  “ my  little  children”  showing  in  our  regard  the 
heart,  as  it  were,  of  a mother  towards  her  newly  born  infants. 
Again,  little  children,  because  the  apostles  were  as  yet  little  in  the 
faith  and  love  of  Christ,  for  they  received  its  fulness  and,  as  it  were, 
their  manhood  from  the  Holy  Ghost  at  Pentecost.  Symbolically 
Cyril  says  that  all  the  Saints  are  little  ones  in  relation  to  Christ 

Yet  a little  (a  little  time)  I am  with  you — because  an  hour  hence 
I shall  be  betrayed  by  Judas  and  given  up  to  the  Jews.  Christ  is 
here  taking  His  last  farewell  of  His  own.  Farewell,  He  says,  My 
well-beloved  children,  for  I am  going  away  from  you  to  death,  and 
after  that  I shall  not  converse  with  you  as  we  have  been  wont,  but 
shall  return  to  heaven. 

Ye  shall  seek  Me , and,  as  I said  to  the  Jews,  whither  l go  ye 
cannot  come . I by  My  death  return  to  heaven ; you,  O apostles, 
bereft  of  My  presence,  shall  seek  Me  in  the  tribulations  and 
persecutions  that  await  you,  and  shall  wish  that  I were  with  you 
that  you  might  consult  Me  in  your  doubts  and  receive  comfort  and 
consolation  from  Me  in  your  troubles;  but  whither  I go  you  cannot 
come , both  because  you  cannot  by  your  own  strength — with  your 
own  feet  and  your  own  natural  powers — follow  Me  when  I ascend 
into  heaven,  and  you  have  not  yet  the  supernatural  strength  of 
grace.  For  you  are  not  yet  strong  enough  to  be  able  to  accompany 
Me  to  the  Cross  and  the  martyr’s  death, — not  yet  so  perfect  in 
grace,  strength,  and  love  as  to  be  fit  for  and  worthy  of  the  king- 
dom of  heaven.  Lastly,  you  cannot  come  there  yet,  because  My 
Heavenly  Father  has  determined  to  send  you  after  My  death  to 
preach  the  gospel  throughout  the  world,  and  bring  all  nations  to 
My  faith  and  salvation. 

As  1 said  to  the  Jews . This,  says  Chrysostom,  He  adds  to  show 
that  it  is  nothing  new  or  fresh,  but  foreseen  and  predicted  long 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


1* 


S.  John,  c.  xnt. 


before,  and  decreed  by  the  Father.  Moreover,  it  was  to  reveal 
to  them  that  they  should  suffer  persecution  and  death  at  the  hands 
of  the  Jews  as  He  was  ill-used  and  slain.  Thirdly,  to  indi»:ate  that 
they,  like  the  Jews,  were  to  suffer  many  tribulations  arid,  at  length, 
death,  though  for  a different  reason  and  a different  end.  For  the 
Jews,  cut  off  by  reason  of  their  crimes,  went  into  hell,  but  the 
Apostles,  slain  for  the  sake  of  the  Gospel,  took  flight  to  heaven. 

And  I say  to  you  now — both  in  order  to  protect  and  arm  you 
against  all  the  tribulations  that  threaten  you,  and  also  that  you 
may  know  at  this  time  that  you  cannot  yet  follow  Me,  but  that 
you  shall  follow  Me  when  perfected  in  strength  and  merits,  and 
following  Me  dying  in  your  own  death,  you  shall  earn  by  faith  in 
Me  the  laurel  of  Martyrdom  in  the  kingdom  of  Heaven.  Hence 
Christ,  clearly  explaining  to  Peter,  says  at  ver.  36 ; Thou  canst  not 
follow  Me  now , but  thou  shalt  hereafter \ 

Ver.  34. — A new  commandment  I give  to  you  ; that  you  love  one 
another.  Why  new  ? Various  reasons  are  given.  S.  Augustine 
says,  because  the  faithful  by  love  put  off  the  old  man  and  put  on  the 
new.  “ Newf  says  Jansenius,  “that  is  renewed  by  Christ,  having 
grown  out  of  date  in  the  minds  of  men.”  Maldonatus  says  that 
“ new  ” means  excellent . surpassing.  As  in  Rev.  vii.,  the  virgins  are 
said  to  sing  “ a new  song,”  that  is  a remarkable  one. 

But  I say  that  the  command  of  love  is  called  new,  because  it  is 
the  chief  characteristic  of  the  New  Testament,  and  specially  com- 
mended by  the  words  and  example  of  Christ ; just  as,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  command  of  fear  was  the  old  command  and  the  chief  one 
among  the  Jews.  The  new  law  is  that  of  love,  as  the  old  was  of 
fear. 

Secondly,  because  Christ  here  taught  us  this  precept  of  love  more 
explicitly,  and  more  forcibly  than  it  had  been  taught  before ; and 
for  this  cause  He  sent  forth  the  Holy  Spirit  at  Pentecost,  that  we 
might  fulfil  this  new  commandment  of  love  with  a new  spirit  of 
love. 

Thirdly,  and  more  appropriately  to  the  actual  circumstances,  new 
in  respect  of  the  new  object  and  cause  of  love.  For  when  Christ  the 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  NEW  COMMANDMENT. 


73 


Hea<J  of  the  Church  was  incarnate,  there  was  brought  about  a pecu- 
liar  community  and  union  among  the  members  of  the  Church,  both 
among  themselves  and  with  Christ  their  Head,  now  made  of  like  nature 
with  themselves.  A union  both  through  the  human  nature  assumed 
by  Christ,  and  by  the  grace  whose  influence  He,  as  Head,  brought 
to  bear  upon  us  as  members,  and  chiefly  by  that  Sacrament  of  the 
Eucharist  here  instituted  by  Him.  And  this  union  is  the  foundation 
of  that  especial  and  more  intimate  love  between  Christ  and  Chris- 
tians, and  of  that  greater  obligation  to  love  one  another.  For  by 
this  union  we  are  closely  bound  not  only  to  the  humanity  of  Christ, 
but  also  to  His  Godhead  and  to  the  Blessed  Trinity,  and  by  and 
through  it  to  one  another. 

This  sense  is  implied  by  Christ  when  He  adds  : that  you  love  one 
another , as  I have  loved  you — because  I have  loved  you  in  a new  and 
especial  manner,  taking  upon  Me  your  flesh  and  giving  it  to  you  by 
means  of  the  Eucharist  which  I have  just  instituted  as  the  food  of 
your  soul,  that  in  this  Sacrament  I might  unite  you  all  to  Me,  and 
to  one  another  in  Me ; for  this  cause  I likewise  demand  of  you,  O 
Christians,  that  you  love  one  another  with  a new  and  peculiar  love, 
not  merely  as  man  loves  man,  because  of  their  common  nature,  but 
as  a Christian  ought  to  love  one  who  is  united  to  himself  in  Christ, 
a fellow-member  of  the  same  Church  of  Christ,  and  participator  of 
the  same  Eucharist  For  Toletus  rightly  observes  that  this  com- 
mand is  given  not  to  all  men,  but  only  to  Christians. 

As  1 have  loved  you^  that  ye  love  one  another ; that  as  I,  when  I was 
in  the  form  of  God,  for  love  of  you  took  the  form  of  a slave  to  teach 
you,  save  you,  and  make  you  blessed,  so  you  too  descend  to  any 
humiliation  or  hardship  whatsoever  in  order  to  help  one  another. 
This  is  what  John  says  in  his  first  Epistle,  iii.  16 — “ In  this  have  we 
known  the  love  of  God,  that  He  laid  down  His  life  for  us ; and  we 
ought  to  lay  down  our  lives  for  the  brethren.” 

The  words,  “ as  I have  loved  you,  ” are  but  taken  as  relating  to  those 
which  follow — “ that  ye  love  one  another •”  Toletus,  and  others,  place 
a colon  before  the  former.  The  former  part  of  the  verse  gives  the 
substance  of  the  precept,  the  latter  signifies  the  mode  of  its  proper 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


74 


S.  JOHN,  c.  XIII. 


execution.  Moreover,  this  latter  part  supplies  a sharp  incentive  to 
this  mutual  love,  as  if  to  say  : The  love  of  Christ  to  you,  O Chris- 

tians, should  stir  you  up  to  love  one  another.  For  those  whom 
Christ  so  loved  you  also,  His  followers,  must  love.  And  again 
Christ  in  His  love  asks  that  you  love  one  another. 

Ver.  35. — In  this  shall  all  men  know  that  ye  are  My  disciples , if  ye 
have  love  towards  one  another \ My  school  is  the  discipline  of  love. 
If,  then,  you  desire  to  follow  Me  as  your  Teacher,  to  be  My  dis- 
ciples, and  to  be  recognised  as  such  by  all  men,  love  one  another. 
This  privilege  is  granted,  therefore,  only  to  charity.  For  it  is  not 
miracles  that  constitute  us  disciples  of  Christ,  nor  intellect,  nor 
eloquence,  nor  strength,  nor  anything  else  but  only  love,  says  S. 
Chrysostom.  For  He  is  the  Master,  Leader,  Prince,  and  Chief  of  love. 
Hence  Paul  says,  Rom.  xiii.  8,  “ He  that  loveth  his  neighbour  hath 
fulfilled  the  law.”  Such  were  the  early  Christians  of  whom  Luke, 
Acts  iv.  32,  says,  “And  the  multitude  of  them  that  believed  had 
one  heart  and  one  soul,  and  had  all  things  in  common.” 

Simon  Peter  says  to  Him ; Lord , whither  goest  Thou  ? Peter, 
says  Chrysostom,  asked  this  not  for  information,  but  that  he  might 
follow  Christ,  whom  he  loved  supremely.  But  Cyril  says  that  he 
was  presuming  too  far ; for  he  thought  that  he  could  follow  Christ 
through  all,  and  he  could  not  yet.  Wherefore  Christ  repressed  him, 
adding,  “ Thou  canst  not  follow  Me  now,  but  thou  shalt  hereafter.” 
At  Rome,  before  the  gate  of  S.  Sebastian,  there  is  a spot  where 
stands  a chapel,  and  there  Christ  appeared  to  S.  Peter,  who,  at  the 
entreaty  of  the  Christians,  was  fleeing  from  the  Mamertine  Prison. 
And  when  Peter  then  asked  Him,  Lord whither  goest  Thou  ? He 
answered,  “ I go  to  Rome , to  he  once  more  crucified.”  So  S.  Peter, 
understanding  that  Christ  was  speaking  of  him,  went  back  to  his 
prison  at  Rome,  and  was  soon  after  crucified  by  Nero.  And  for 
this  reason  that  chapel  is  called  to  this  day  the  “ Domine  quo 
vadis  f ” 

Jesus  saith  to  Him  : Whither  1 go  thou  canst  not  follow  Me  now . 
Because  thou  hast  not  yet  received  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  whose 
strength  thou  mayest  overcome  death,  says  Cyril.  For  Christ  must 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


WHY  PETER  TELL. 


75 


needs  go  first  and  conquer  death.  Thou  hast  not  now  that  con- 
stancy of  soul  and  strength  to  die  for  Me ; but  the  Holy  Ghost  will 
come  upon  thee,  and  then  shalt  thou  be  able.  Moreover,  Christ 
had  destined  Peter  to  be  Head  of  the  apostles,  Prince  and  Ruler  of 
the  Church  after  Himself,  and  Founder  of  the  Roman  Pontificate. 

But  thou  shalt  follow  Me  hereafter , on  the  cross,  and,  by  the 
cross,  to  heaven.  The  love  and  zeal  of  Peter  at  this  time  merited 
for  him  the  privilege  of  being  the  first  to  follow  Christ  on  the  cross. 

Ver.  37. — Peter  says  to  Him , Why  can  I not  follow  Thee  now  l 
I will  lay  down  my  life  for  Thee.  Peter  says  this  with  his  wonted 
fervour  and  zeal,  but  a zeal  not  according  to  knowledge.  For, 
suspecting  that  Christ  was  going  to  death,  as  He  had  foretold,  he 
offers  himself  as  a comrade  to  share  all  dangers  with  Him.  I am 
ready  with  Thee  to  take  every  chance  of  danger ; I offer  myself  to 
Thee  as  a companion  for  all  that  may  befall;  with  Thee  and  for 
Thee  I will  gladly  welcome  death.  The  affectionate  feeling  of 
Peter  for  Christ,  though  without  effect,  is  worthy  of  praise ; he  had 
not  yet  received  the  wings  of  love  from  the  Holy  Ghost  to  fly  to 
so  lofty  a cross. 

Ver.  38. — Jesus  answered  him  : Layest  thou  thy  life  down  for  Mel 
Verily  I say  unto  thee , The  cock  shall  not  crow  before  thou  deny  Me 
thrice.  Christ  humbles  Peter,  who  trusts  too  much  in  himself,  and 
suffers  him  to  fall,  that  he  may  learn  to  confide  not  in  his  own 
strength  but  in  the  grace  of  Christ.  Wherefore  Christ  repeatedly 
made  this  prediction  to  Peter.  Hear  S.  Chrysostom  (Horn.  72), 
M Thou  shalt  know  by  experience  that  thy  love  is  nothing  without 
Divine  grace.  And  hence  it  appears  that  Jesus  permitted  this  fall 
for  his  benefit.” 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


( 76  ) 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

I  Christ  comforteth  His  disciples  with  the  hope  of  heaven.  6 Professeth  Himselj 
the  way , the  truths  and  the  life , and  one  with  the  Father.  13  Assureth 
their  prayers  in  His  name  to  be  effectual.  1 5 Requesteth  love  and  obedience. 
16  Promiseth  the  Holy  Ghost  the  Comforter . 27  And  leaveth  His  peace  with 
them. 

LET  not  your  heart  be  troubled  : ye  believe  in  God,  believe  also  in  me. 

2  In  my  Father’s  house  are  many  mansions  : if  it  were  not  so,  I would 
have  told  you.  I go  to  prepare  a place  for  you. 

3  And  if  I go  and  prepare  a place  for  you,  I will  come  again,  and  receive  you 
unto  myself  5 that  where  I am,  there  ye  may  be  also. 

4  And  whither  I go  ye  know,  and  the  way  ye  know. 

5  Thomas  saith  unto  him,  Lord,  we  know  not  whither  thou  goest ; and  how 
can  we  know  the  way? 

6  Jesus  saith  unto  him,  I am  the  way,  and  the  truth,  and  the  life : no  man 
cometh  unto  the  Father,  but  by  me. 

7  If  ye  had  known  me,  ye  should  have  known  my  Father  also  : and  from  hence- 
forth ye  know  him,  and  have  seen  him. 

8  Philip  saith  unto  him,  Lord,  show  us  the  Father,  and  it  sufficeth  us. 

9  Jesus  saith  unto  him,  Have  I been  so  long  time  with  you,  and  yet  hast  thou 
not  known  me,  Philip?  he  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father;  and  how 
sayest  thou  then , Show  us  the  Father  ? 

10  Believest  thou  not  that  I am  in  the  Father,  and  the  Father  in  me  ? the 
words  that  I speak  unto  you,  I speak  not  of  myself : but  the  Father,  that  dwelleth 
in  me,  he  doeth  the  works. 

1 1  Believe  me  that  I am  in  the  Father,  and  the  Father  in  me  : or  else  believe 
me  for  the  very  works*  sake. 

12  Verily,  verily,  I say  unto  you,  He  that  believeth  on  me,  the  works  that  I do 
shall  he  do  also  ; and  greater  works  than  these  shall  he  do  ; because  I go  unto  my 
Father. 

13  And  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  my  name,  that  will  I do,  that  the  Father 
may  be  glorified  in  the  Son. 

14  If  ye  shall  ask  anything  in  my  name,  I will  do  it, 

15  If  ye  love  me,  keep  my  commandments  : 

16  And  I will  pray  the  Father,  and  he  shall  give  you  another  Comforter,  that 
he  may  abide  with  you  for  ever ; 

17  Even  the  spirit  of  truth  ; whom  the  world  cannot  receive,  because  it  seeth 
him  not,  neither  knoweth  him  : but  ye  know  him  ; for  he  dwelleth  with  you,  and 
shall  be  in  you. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHRIST  COMFORTS  HIS  DISCIPLES. 


77 


1 8 I will  not  leave  you  comfortless  ; I will  come  to  you. 

19  Yet  a little  while,  and  the  world  seeth  me  no  more;  but  ye  see  me  ; because 
I live,  ye  shall  live  also. 

20  At  that  day  ye  shall  know  that  I am  in  my  Father,  and  ye  in  me,  and  I in 
you. 

21  He  that  hath  my  commandments,  and  keepeth  them,  he  it  is  that  loveth 
me ; and  he  that  loveth  me  shall  be  loved  of  my  Father,  and  I will  love  him,  and 
will  manifest  myself  to  him. 

22  Judas  saith  unto  him  (not  Iscariot),  Lord,  how  is  it  that  thou  wilt  manifest 
thyself  unto  us,  and  not  unto  the  world  ? 

23  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  him,  If  a man  love  me,  he  will  keep  my 
words  : and  my  Father  will  love  him,  and  we  will  come  unto  him,  and  make  our 
abode  with  him. 

24  He  that  loveth  me  not  keepeth  not  my  sayings : and  the  word  which  ye 
hear  is  not  mine,  but  the  Father’s  which  sent  me. 

25  These  things  have  I spoken  unto  you,  being  yet  present  with  you. 

26  But  the  Comforter,  which  is  the  Holy  Ghost,  whom  the  Father  will  send  in 
my  name,  he  shall  teach  you  all  things,  and  bring  all  things  to  your  remembrance, 
whatsoever  I have  said  unto  you. 

27  Peace  I leave  with  you,  my  peace  I give  unto  you  : not  as  the  world 
giveth,  give  I unto  you.  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled,  neither  let  it  be  afraid. 

28  Ye  have  heard  how  I said  unto  you,  I go  away,  and  come  again  unto  you. 
If  ye  loved  me,  ye  would  rejoice,  because  I said,  I go  unto  the  Father : for  my 
Father  is  greater  than  L 

29  And  now  I have  told  you  before  it  come  to  pass,  that,  when  it  is  come  to 
pass,  ye  might  believe. 

30  Hereafter  I will  not  talk  much  with  you;  for  the  prince  of  this  world 
cometh,  and  hath  nothing  in  me. 

31  But  that  the  world  may  know  that  I love  the  Father;  and  as  the  Father 
gave  me  commandment,  even  so  I do.  Arise,  let  us  go  hence. 

Let  not  your  heart , &*c.  Christ  saw  that  the  minds  of  His  dis- 
ciples were  troubled,  i.e.  anxious  and  sorrowful,  because  He  had  fore- 
told them  that  His  own  departure  and  Passion,  through  the  treachery 
of  Judas,  was  at  hand,  as  well  as  the  scandal  of  Peter’s  threefold 
denial  of  Him.  For  they  feared  lest  they  also  through  dread  of  the 
Jews  should  betray  Christ  For  if  Peter,  who  seemed  as  firm  as  a 
rock,  was  about  to  do  so,  would  not  the  rest,  who  were  weaker 
and  more  timid,  do  the  same  ? Christ  heals  this  their  perturbation 
by  the  words,  Ye  believe  in  God%  believe  also  in  Me. 

The  Greek  reads  for  ye  believe , cr/mu«ri,  i.e.  Believe  ye  in  God , or, 
ye  believe , &*c.  The  meaning  is,  If  ye  believe  in  God,  as  I know  ye 
do,  believe  also  in  Me,  and  consequently  trust  Me.  For  I am  God. 
By  this  faith  and  confidence  ye  may  overcome  all  your  fears,  and 


Digitized  by  ' 


7 8 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIV. 


be  made  partakers  of  My  promises.  Cast  all  your  cares  and 
anxieties  upon  Me,  your  Lord  and  your  God.  For  although  I go 
away  from  you  as  to  My  bodily  presence,  yet  in  My  spirit,  in  My 
care  and  guidance  of  you,  I shall  be  always  with  you. 

Listen  to  S.  Chrysostom.  He  shows  the  power  of  His  Divinity, 
setting  out  what  they  had  in  their  minds.  As  if  He  said,  “Ye 
fear  the  adversity  which  hangs  over  Me  and  you.  Lay  aside  your  fear. 
For  faith  in  Me  and  the  Father  is  mightier  than  those  things  which 
will  come  upon  us.  And  nothing  can  prevail  against  it.”  And  S. 
Augustine  says,  “ Lest  as  men  they  should  fear  the  death  of  Christ, 
and  so  be  troubled,  He  consoles  them,  declaring  that  He  is  God. 
As  though  He  said,  Ye  fear  death  for  this  form  of  a servant ; let  not 
your  heart  be  troubled,  the  form  of  God  will  raise  it  up.”  More- 
over Christ  did  this,  as  Ribera  says,  like  husbandmen  who  attach 
a weakly  vine  to  an  elm,  that  it  may  from  the  elm  receive  strength 
to  mount  up  and  grow,  even  though  wind  and  storms  rage  against  it 
Thus  the  Lord  joins  the  apostles  to  Himself  as  a most  strong  wall, 
by  faith : as  it  is  said  in  Ps.  26,  “The  Lord  is  my  light  and  my 
salvation,  whom  then  shall  I fear?”  Let  the  Christian  think  that 
the  same  thing  is  said  to  himself  by  Christ  when  he  is  harassed  by 
temptation,  trouble,  or  fear.  “ Thou  believest  in  God,  believe  also 
in  thy  Christ.  He  will  be  present  with  thee,  and  give  thee 
strength.  He  will  open  out  for  thee  a way  of  escape,  and  make 
thee  conqueror.” 

In  My  Fathers  house, . Christ  had  said  that  He  was  about  to 
go  to  the  Father,  and  that  Peter  would  follow  Him  thither,  but 
He  had  said  nothing  concerning  the  other  disciples.  They  feared 
therefore  that  they  should  be  shut  out  from  the  Father’s  house 
and  from  heaven.  This  fear  Christ  removes.  “Fear  not,  for 
though  it  be  that  I do  not  take  you  with  Me  now  to  My  Father’s 
kingdom,  yet  I will  cause  you  to  follow  Me  in  due  time.  Do  not 
suppose  that  Peter  only  will  follow  Me  thither,  as  if  there  were 
only  room  for  Myself  and  Peter.  I tell  you  there  will  not  be 
wanting  room  for  you  likewise.  For  in  My  Father's  house  are 
many  mansions . For  heaven  is  a vast  empyrean,  and  has  innumer- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MANY  MANSIONS.  79 

able  mansions,  sufficient  to  hold  all  men  whatsoever.”  So  SS. 
Augustine  and  Chrysostom. 

Moreover,  the  expression  many , intimates  that  there  are  in  heaven 
various  degrees  and  ranks  of  blessedness  and  glory.  As  it  were  said, 
To  each  saint  shall  be  his  own  place  in  heaven,  to  each  his  own 
beatitude,  his  own  glory,  in  accordance  with  the  merit  of  each.  So 
the  Fathers  against  Jovinian,  who  thought  that  as  all  virtues  are 
equal,  so  likewise  would  be  all  rewards  in  heaven. 

Listen  to  St.  Gregory  (lib.  4,  “Moral,”  ch.  31),  “ In  the  many  man- 
sions shall  be  a concordant  diversity  of  requital.  For  so  great  shall 
be  the  might  of  the  love  which  shall  unite  us  in  that  house  of  peace, 
that  whatsoever  any  one  shall  not  receive  in  himself,  he  shall  rejoice 
to  have  received  it  in  another.  Wherefore,  although  all  did  not 
labour  equally  in  the  vineyard,  yet  every  one  received  a penny. 
And  indeed  with  the  Father  there  are  many  mansion,  and  yet  the 
different  labourers  receive  the  same  penny,  because  to  all  shall  be 
the  one  blessed  gladness,  although  not  to  all  the  same  sublimity  of 
life.”  The  same  S.  Gregory  says,  that  to  a certain  Stephen  these 
many  mansions  were  shown  full  of  a marvellous  light  Christ  then 
by  these  words,  and  by  this  exhibition  of  the  heavenly  reward,  ani- 
mates the  apostles,  so  that  they  should  not  dread  the  temptations 
and  persecutions  which  were  impending  over  them,  but  should 
rather  court  them,  forasmuch  as  by  their  means  they  were  about  to 
obtain  such  rewards. 

If  it  were  not  so , i.e.  if  it  were  otherwise,  I would  have  told  you. 
First,  it  is  as  though  He  said,  “ I would  have  told  you  that  I was 
going  away  that  I might  go  to  prepare  a place  for  you  in  heaven, 
unless  there  were  already  many  mansions  prepared  there ; but 
because  they  are  already  prepared,  I said  not  to  you,  1 will  go  to 
prepare  them.19 

2.  Following  the  Greek  and  Syriac,  which  omit  the  word  that 
before  I go,  Arias  Montanus  simply  expounds  as  follows : “ There 
are  many  mansions  in  My  Father’s  house.  If  it  were  not  so  I would 
tell  you  plainly ; nor  would  I deceive  you  with  the  vain  hope  that 
I am  going  to  prepare  a place  for  you.”  As  though  He  said,  “ Since 


So 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIV. 


I so  greatly  love  you,  that  I am  going  away  from  you  for  the  sake 
of  preparing  a place  for  you,  how  should  I suffer  you  to  be  deceived 
in  so  great  a matter?  To  prepare  a place  is  to  come  into  possession 
of  heaven,  which  until  that  time  had  been  closed  to  man.  When  I 
ascend,  the  heavens  shall  be  opened  to  you,  according  as  it  is  said, 
‘Lift  your  gates,  ye  princes,  and  the  King  of  glory  shall  come  in,* 
(Ps.  xxiv.  Vulg.) ; and,  ‘ He  shall  ascend  preparing  the  way  before 
them*”  (Mic.  ii.  Vulg.) 

You  will  say,  if  mansions  were  already  prepared  for  the  apostles 
in  heaven,  why  does  Christ  go  to  prepare  a place  for  them?  I 
answer,  both  are  true.  For,  ist,  these  mansions  were  prepared  for 
the  apostles  and  the  rest  of  the  elect  from  all  eternity,  by  God’s 
predestination,  in  the  first  intention,  as  it  were.  2d,  Christ  went, 
nevertheless,  to  prepare  them  in  act,  as  it  were ; namely,  to  bring 
the  apostles  into  possession  of  them  so  to  say.  Moreover,  Christ 
made  plain  the  way  to  heaven,  which  before  was  shut,  by  His 
ascension.  For  He  by  His  own  blood  and  death  upon  the  cross 
paid  to  God  the  price  of  those  heavenly  mansions,  and  by  that  price 
purchased  them  for  us.  Moreover,  when  Christ  ascended,  He  sent 
the  Holy  Ghost  from  heaven,  that  He,  by  His  peace,  might  render 
the  apostles  and  the  rest  of  the  elect  worthy  of  heaven. 

So  S.  Augustine.  “ How,”  saith  he,  “ does  He  prepare,  if  there 
are  already  many  ? They  are  not  yet  in  existence  if  they  are  still 
to  be  prepared.  But  they  do  already  exist  by  predestination. 
Otherwise,  He  would  have  said,  I will  go  and  prepare , t.e.  I will 
predestinate.  But  it  was  because  they  were  not  prepared  as  a 
matter  of  actual  existence  that  He  said,  If  I go  away  and  prepare , 
&c.,  He  is  preparing  the  mansions  by  preparing  their  destined 
inhabitants.  For  that  is  the  house  of  God,  of  which  the  apostle 
says,  ‘ The  temple  of  God  is  holy,  which  temple  are  ye/  It  is  still 
being  built,  it  is  yet  being  prepared.  He  speaks  of  going  away  to 
prepare,  because  the  just  live  by  faith.  For  if  thou  seest  there  is 
no  faith,  the  thing  is  hid  that  it  may  be  believed,  then  is  the  place 
being  prepared  if  there  is  a life  of  faith ; being  believed  it  is  desired, 
that  that  which  is  longed  for  may  be  possessed.  He  goes  away  by 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  WAY  TO  HEAVEN. 


*1 


becoming  unseen.  He  comes  by  appearing.  But  unless  He  abide 
with  us  to  rule  us,  that  we  may  make  progress  in  good  living,  we 
shall  not  have  a place  prepared  for  us  where  we  can  abide  in  con- 
tinual gladness.” 

Ver.  3. — AndifI go  away , &c.  IJ  Le.  when,  I go  away  into  heaven 
and  there  prepare  a place  for  you  and  all  your  successors,  that  is, 
for  all  the  elect,  by  giving  them  through  the  ages  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  His  grace  by  which  He  may  prepare  them  for  celestial  glory  ; 
when,  I say,  this  has  been  accomplished,  then  I will  come  again  in 
the  day  of  judgment,  and  receive  you  all  to  Myself,  and  crown  you 
with  a worthy  reward  in  heaven. 

And  whither  I go , ye  kno7v,  &c. ; i.e.  Ye  can,  and  ought  easily 
know,  because  ye  have  often  heard  of  Me  that  I am  going  to* 
the  Father  in  heaven,  and  that  the  road  to  heaven  is  My  faith,  doc- 
trine, passion,  and  cross.  The  Apostles  knew  that  Christ  had  said 
these  things,  but  they  did  not  yet  understand  them,  which  was  the 
reason  why  they  did  not  remember  them.  So  S.  Augustine, 
Maldonatus. 

Yer.  5. — Thomas  saith  unto  Him , &c.  Since  we  know  not 
whither  Thou  goest,  how  can  we  know  the  way?  For  he  who 
knows  not  the  goal  to  which  a way  leads,  cannot  be  said  to  know 
the  way  to  that  goal.  We  indeed  have  heard  Thee  say  that  Thou 
art  going  to  Thy  Father’s  house,  where  there  are  many  mansions,  to 
prepare  us  a place.  But  where  is  this  Father’s  house  ? Where  are 
those  many  mansions  ? If  this  house  is  heaven,  as  we  suppose  it  is, 
declare  the  matter  to  us  more  fully  and  explicitly.  Explain  to  us 
concerning  these  mansions  where  and  in  what  region  they  are.  For 
the  vastness  of  heaven,  or  rather  of  the  many  heavens,  is  infinite. 
Thus  Thomas.  “ But  Christ,”  as  Cyril  says,  “gave  no  response  to 
this  overweening  curiosity.  For  He  does  not  explain  the  whole 
subject,  but  leaving  that  for  a fitting  season,  He  unfolds  only  what 
is  necessary  for  the  present  time.” 

Jesus  saith  to  him , &c.  Briefly  the  genuine  meaning  is  this : 
u Thou  askest,  O Thomas,  two  questions,  viz.,  about  My  way  and 

its  terminus,  whither  I am  going,  and  what  road  ? I answer  thus, 

VOL.  v.  F 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIV. 


*2 

* I am  the  way  which  thou  seekest,  a way  not  deceitful,  but  true,  a 
way  which  leads  to  true  life,  even  to  God  the  Father  in  heaven, 
where  is  My  Father’s  house,  in  which  are  the  many  mansions  I have 
spoken  of.’”  Wherefore  He  adds,  by  way  of  explanation,  No  one 
cometh  to  the  Father  but  by  Me.  The  Father,  therefore,  is  the  goal 
or  terminus.  I am  the  way  to  it.  I am  the  way9  i.e.  I am  the 
teacher,  the  guide,  and  the  leader  of  the  true  way  which  leads  straight 
to  the  eternal  and  beatific  life.  I xim  the  way , because  I point  out 
and  teach  the  true  faith  and  the  holy  living,  which  is  the  true  way 
to  everlasting  life.  There  is  an  allusion  to  Isa.  xxx.  20,  21,  “Thine 
eyes  shall  see  thy  teachers,  and  thine  ears  shall  hear  a word  behind 
thee,  saying,  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it,  when  ye  turn  to  the  right 
hand,  and  when  ye  turn  to  the  left” 

But  because  some  ways  are  true  and  right,  others  false  and 
erroneous,  therefore  is  Christ  called  the  way  andthetruth9  Le.  the  true 
and  right  way  according  to  the  words  in  Isa.  xxxv.  8,  “ And  this 
shall  be  to  you  the  direct  way,  so  that  fools  shall  not  err  in  it.’* 
(Vulg.)  As  though  Christ  said,  both  Jewish  and  Gentile  philosophers 
have  taught  many  things  concerning  blessedness  and  the  virtues 
which  as  a road  lead  to  blessedness,  yet  they  have  fallen  into  many 
errors,  and  so  have  led  men  not  to  life,  but  to  the  destruction  of  hell. 
For  as  they  made  blessedness — not  true  indeed,  but  false  blessedness 
— to  consist  in  riches,  honours,  and  vain  science,  so  they  have  gone 
themselves,  and  led  others  into  no  good,  or  true,  but  into  a false 
way.  But  I teach  true  faith  and  unity  and  those  other  virtues  by 
which  you  may  arrive  by  a direct  way  at  that  true  and  eternal  life 
which  is  with  the  Father,  and  therefore  with  Me.  For  I and  the 
Father  are  one.  For  as  the  Father  is  beatific  life,  both  formal  and 
causative,  because  He  communicates  the  same  to  us,  and  also 
objective  life,  because  He  is  the  author  of  the  beatific  vision,  so 
likewise  am  I the  very  self-same  life  and  truth.  I therefore  am  He 
who  points  out  to  you  the  right  road  to  heaven.  I am  He  who  as 
the  Truth  delivers  you  from  every  error  of  the  mind.  I am  He 
who  leads  you  to  true  life. 

From  hence  it  is  plain  that  Christ  is  the  way : — 1.  Because  by 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHRIST  THE  WAY. 


83 


the  merit  of  His  Passion  He  has  opened  to  us  the  way  to  heaven. 

2.  Because  by  His  doctrine  He  shows  us  the  same  way.  3.  Because 
He  inspires  us  with  faith  and  grace  and  good  works  and  merits,  by 
which  as  by  a path  we  walk  to  life  eternal.  4.  Because  by  this  way 
of  a holy  life  and  by  His  Passion  He  has  gone  before  us,  treading 
it  first  Himself,  that  we  might  follow  Him  in  the  same,  and  imi- 
tating Him,  arrive  at  the  heaven  whither  He  has  gone. 

This  is  the  genuine  meaning  of  this  passage.  But  since  this  is  a 
golden  saying  of  Christ,  let  us  listen  to  various  comments  and  obser- 
vations of  the  Fathers  upon  it 

1.  S.  Leo  (Serm.  2,  de  Resur.)  says,  “ Christ  is  the  way  of  holy 
conversation,  the  truth  of  Divine  doctrine,  the  life  of  everlasting 
blessedness.” 

2.  S.  Cyril  saith,  “ Christ  is  our  way  by  the  actions  of  His  life, 
the  truth  by  a right  faith,  the  life  by  the  well-spring  of  sanctification.” 
The  meaning  is,  No  one  cometh  to  the  Father,  who  is  the  true  life 
and  blessedness,  except  by  love  he  walk  in  Me,  who  am  the  way ; 
and  by  faith  believe  in  Me,  who  am  the  truth ; and  by  hope  confide 
in  Me,  who  am  eternal  life. 

3.  S.  Bernard  ( Semi . 2,  de.  Ascens .),  a Let  us  follow  Thee,  O Lord, 
by  Thee,  to  Thee  : for  Thou  art  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life — the 
way  by  example,  the  truth  by  promise,  the  life  by  reward.”  And  the 
same  S.  Bernard  {Semi.  2,  de.  Ccena.  Dorn.)  says,  “ I am  the  way  by 
which  you  must  go  ; the  truth,  to  which  you  must  come ; the  life,  in 
which  you  must  abide.” 

4.  S.  Augustine  says,  “ Christ  is  the  way  according  to  His  humanity 
by  which  He  comes  to  us,  and  returns  to  the  Father.  The  same  is 
the  truth  and  the  life  according  to  His  Divinity.”  Again  he  says 
(1 Serm . 55,  de.  Verb . Dom.)y  “ What  road  dost  thou  wish  to  go?  I am 
the  way.  Whither  wilt  thou  go  ? I am  the  truth.  Where  wilt  thou 
abide?  I am  the  life.  Every  man  desires  truth  and  life.  Even 
the  philosophers  saw  in  some  dim  way  that  God  was  truth  and  life, 
but  not  all  found  the  way.  Therefore  the  Word  of  God  who  is  with 
the  Father  is  truth  and  life,  by  becoming  man  is  made  the  way. 
Walk  by  this  Man,  and  thou  wilt  arrive  at  God.  It  is  better  to  limp 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


84 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIV. 


\ 


in  the  way  than  to  walk  bravely  outside  of  the  way.”  The  same  S. 
Augustine  (Tract.  69)  further  says,  “ By  the  form  of  a servant  the 
Lord  came  to  us,  and  returned  to  Himself,  taking  back  flesh  from 
death  unto  life.  By  the  flesh  He  came  as  God  to  man,  the  Truth 
to  liars.  For  let  God  be  true,  but  every  man  a liar.” 

5.  S.  Hilary  (lib.  7,  de  Trin.)  says,  “ He  who  is  the  way  cannot  lead 
us  wrong.  Nor  does  He  who  is  the  truth  deceive  by  illusions.  Nor 
does  He  who  is  the  life  leave  us  in  the  terror  of  death.  If  I am  the 
way,  ye  need  no  other  guide.  If  I am  the  truth,  I cannot  declare 
what  is  false.  If  the  life,  even  though  ye  die,  ye  shall  come  to 
Me.” 

6.  S.  Chrysostom  says,  “ I am  the  way,  because  by  Me  ye  shall 
come.  I am  the  truth,  because  the  things  which  I have  spoken  are 
beyond  questioning.  I am  the  life,  because  not  even  death  itself 
can  hinder  you  from  coming  to  Me.” 

7.  S.  Ambrose  (lib.  de  bono  mort.\  “ Christ  saith,  I am  the  way, 
&c.  Let  us  walk  in  this  way,  let  us  hold  the  truth,  let  us  follow  the 
life.  It  is  the  way  which  brings  us,  the  truth  which  confirms  us,  the 
life  which  is  given  them  that  persevere.”  And  again  he  saith, 
“We  follow  Thee,  O Lord  Jesus;  but  call  us  that  we  may  follow, 
for  no  one  ascends  without  Thee.  Receive  us  as  the  way,  confirm 
us  as  the  truth,  quicken  us  as  the  life.” 

Symbolically,  Christ  is  the  way  of  beginners,  purifying  them  by  a 
hatred  of  sin,  and  a detestation  of  their  past  life.  The  same  is  the 
truth  of  the  more  advanced,  illuminating  them  by  the  examples  of 
virtues,  and  the  desire  of  a new  and  holy  conversation.  The  same 
is  the  life  of  the  perfect,  uniting  them  to  God  by  the  affections  of 
pure  love.  Hear  S.  Bernard,  summing  up  many  things.  “ I am  the 
way  of  light  and  calm,  truth  that  liveth  without  pain,  life  that  is 
happy  and  pleasant.  I am  the  way  upon  the  cross,  the  truth  in  the 
pit  itself,  the  life  in  the  joy  of  resurrection.  I am  the  way,  in  which 
there  are  neither  thorns  nor  thistles.  The  truth,  in  which  there  is  no 
sting  of  falsehood.  The  life,  in  which  he  that  is  dead  lives  again. 
I am  the  right  way,  the  perfect  truth,  the  life  that  shall  never  end. 
I am  the  way  of  reconciliation,  the  truth  of  recompense,  the  life  of 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


VISION  OF  S.  BENEDICT. 


85 


eternal  blessedness.  No  man  cometh  to  the  Father  but  by  Me,  ue. 
no  man  cometh  to  Me,  the  truth  and  the  life,  except  by  Me  the 
way.”  * 

Tropologicallv,  S.  Basil  remarks  “ that  Christ  is  called  the  way,  to 
denote  that  Christians  ought  daily  to  walk  and  proceed  in  the  path 
of  virtue,  according  to  the  words  in  the  Psalms,  ‘They  shall  go 
from  virtue  to  virtue  * (Vulg.)  For  in  truth  this  is  the  good  way, 
knowing  no  devious  wanderings;  I mean  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
who  truly  is  good,  who  leads  us  to  the  Father.  For  no  one, 
saith  He,  cometh  to  the  Father  but  by  Me.  Such  is  the  way  of 
our  return  to  God  through  His  Son.”  Thus  far  S.  Basil,  who 
says  that  Christ  is  the  way,  not  only  by  faith,  but  by  the  exercise 
of  virtues. 

Anagogically,  S.  Augustine  ( de  Sent.  num.  268),  “The  Lord  saith, 
I am  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life,  i.e.  by  Me  you  must  walk,  to 
Me  you  must  come,  in  Me  you  must  remain.  For  when  we  come 
to  Him  we  arrive  also  at  the  Father,  because  by  means  of  His  equal 
He  to  whom  He  is  equal  is  known.  And  the  Holy  Spirit  binds 
and  most  closely  unites  us  to  Him,  so  that  we  may  abide  in  the  per- 
fect and  unchangeable  Good  for  ever.” 

Hence  S.  Bernard,  when  he  was  dying,  appeared  to  a certain 
absent  friend  saying  that  he  was  going  upwards,  “for  the  truth  is 
above/  For  below  in  earth  there  is  nothing  but  vanity  and  false- 
hood, as  we  are  taught  in  Ecclesiastes.  “ Here,”  said  S.  Bernard, 
“ there  is  no  knowledge,  no  recognition  of  the  truth ; above  is  there 
plenitude  of  science,  above  is  the  true  knowledge  of  the  truth.” 
And  two  of  S.  Benedict's  monks  had  this  vision  of  him  when  he 
was  dying.  They  beheld  a path  stretching  direct  from  his  cell  to 
heaven,  eastwards.  This  path  was  spread  with  tapestry,  and  bright 
with  innumerable  lamps.  A man  of  venerable  aspect,  and  clad  in 
glorious  apparel,  stood  over  the  monks,  and  asked  them,  Whose  was 
the  path  which  they  beheld  ? They  replied  that  they  knew  not. 
Then  he  said,  “ This  is  the  way  by  which  Benedict,  the  beloved  of 
the  Lord,  ascendeth  to  heaven  ” ( S '.  Greg.  Dial  l.  2 c.  37). 

No  one  cometh , &c.  Because  lam  the  way  to  the  Father,  who  is 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


86 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIV. 


the  goal  and  terminus.  No  one , i.e.  of  men ; but  Suarez  adds, 
of  angels  also.  For  he  thinks  that  all  the  angels  have  received  all 
their  graces  and  glory  from  Christ  and  His  merits. 

Ver.  7. — If  ye  had  known  Me , &c.  Christ  meets  an  objection. 
The  disciples  might  have  objected,  “Thou,  O Christ,  declarest  that 
Thou  art  the  way , but  the  Father  is  the  goal  to  which  thou  goest 
But  we  do  not  know  the  Father,  wherefore  neither  do  we  know  the 
goal  to  which  both  Thou  and  we  are  going.  Cause  us  therefore  to 
know  the  Father.  Again,  if  the  Father  is  the  goal,  Thou  the  way, 
how  sayest  Thou,  I am  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life  ? That  is 
both  the  way  and  the  goal  ? ” Christ  answers  that  both  are  true. 
u For  I,”  saith  He,  “ have  one  essence  with  the  Father,  one  and 
the  same  Godhead.  Wherefore,  if  ye  had  known  Me  clearly  and 
fully,  ye  would  have  known  My  Father  also  ; ” for  the  Apostles  knew 
indeed  and  believed  that  Christ  was  the  Son  of  God,  but  they  did 
not  as  yet  believe  that  He  was  con  substantial  with  the  Father  ; 
but  they  did  know  this  after  they  had  received  the  Holy  Ghost 
Wherefore  He  adds, 

And from  henceforth  ye  shall  know  Him , and  have  seen  Him . Ye 

shall  know  is  the  reading  of  the  Vulgate,  of  S.  Chrysostom,  and  S. 
Hilary.  He  means,  Ye  shall  know  the  Father  at  Pentecost  by  the 
illumination  of  the  Holy  Ghost ; yea,  ye  have  already  seen  Him  in 
Me,  for  he  who  seeth  Me  seeth  My  Father  also , as  Christ  subjoins. 
The  Greek,  Syriac,  and  Arabic  read  ye  know , in  the  present 

tense.  u Even  now  ye  know  the  Father,  because  ye  have  seen  Him 
in  Me  working  so  many  miracles.  For  although  ye  have  not  seen 
Him  as  He  is  in  His  Essence  and  Godhead,  ye  have  seen  Him 
veiled  in  My  humanity,  as  with  a cloud,  by  means  of  the  signs  and 
miracles,  which,  like  thunderings  and  lightnings,  come  forth  from 
It.”  So  S.  Cyril. 

Ver.  8. — Philip  saith  unto  Him , &c. — Philip  did  not  understand 
Christ’s  answer ; how,  namely,  he  who  knows  Christ  knows  also  the 
Father.  He  urges  therefore  Christ  to  show  them  the  Father  Himself. 
“ Thou  sayest  that  the  Father  is  in  Thee,  as  it  were  lies  hid  in  Thee. 
Open  Thyself,  and  shew  Him  to  us.” 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


MEANING  OF  IT  SUFFICETH.  87 

And  it  sufficeth  us . 1st.  Says  S.  Chrysostom,  we  desire  nothing 
else  but  to  be  shown  the  Father. 

2d.  S.  Cyril,  It  sufficeth  us,  viz.,  for  blessedness,  that  we  should 
be  delivered  from  all  trouble  and  sorrow ; for  since  the  Father  is 
God  He  will  bless  us. 

3d.  It  sufficcth  us,  for  confounding  the  Jews,  who  deny  that 
Thou  art  the  Son  of  God. 

4th.  And  more  simply,  as  though  it  were  said,  “ instead  of  all  the 
reasons  which  Thou,  O Christ,  bringest  together,  to  console  us  in  our 
sorrow  for  Thy  death,  we  ask  one,  that  Thou  wouldst  show  us  the 
Father.  This  one  will  suffice  us  instead  of  all  the  rest.” 

Anagogically.  Hear  S.  Augustine,  “ With  that  joy  which  shall  fill 
us  with  His  countenance  nothing  more  will  be  required.”  This 
Philip  well  understood  when  he  said,  Lord,  show  us  the  Father,  and  it 
sufficcth  us.  But  he  did  not  yet  understand  that  he  might  say,  Lord, 
show  us  Thyself,  and  it  sufficeth  us.  But  that  he  might  understand 
this,  he  received  the  answer,  Have  1 been  so  long  time  with  you  ? &c. 

Herein  is  that  saying  of  S.  Augustine  true,  “ Thou  sufficest  for 
God,  let  God  be  sufficient  for  thee.”  For  God  is  Saddai,  i.e.,  suffi- 
cient, abundance  of  all  good  things.”  Wherefore  the  Psalmist  says, 
“ We  shall  be  satisfied  when  Thy  glory  shall  appear”  (xvi.  15)  ; and, 
“They  shall  be  inebriated  from  the  richness  of  Thy  house,  and 
Thou  shalt  give  them  drink  from  the  torrent  of  Thy  pleasure” 
(xxxv.  9) ; and,  “ Whom  have  I in  heaven  but  Thee  ? and  there  is  none 
upon  earth  that  I desire  • besides  Thee.  My  flesh  and  my  heart 
faileth ; but  God  is  the  strength  of  my  heart,  and  my  portion  for 
ever”  (lxxiii.  25,  26). 

The  reason  d priori  is,  because  God  made  man  after  His  own 
image  and  likeness,  wherefore  He  gave  him  an  infinite  capacity,  and 
infinite  desires,  such  as  cannot  be  satisfied  with  any  finite  goods. 
Therefore  it  is  necessary  that  God  alone,  who  is  infinite  Good, 
should  fill  and  satisfy  that  capacity.  As  S.  Augustine  says  {lib.  1,  Conf. 
c.  1),  “ O Lord,  thou  hast  made  us  for  Thyself,  and  our  heart  is 
restless  until  it  rests  in  Thee.”  And  the  same  saith  {in  Ps.  lxii), 
“ Lovest  thou  riches?  God  Himself  will  be  thy  riches.  Lovest 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


88 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIV. 


thou  a fountain  of  good  ? What  is  more  excellent  than  wisdom  ? 
What  more  full  of  light  ? Whatever  here  can  be  loved,  He  who 
made  all  things  shall  be  Thine  instead  of  all  things.” 

Ver.  9 .—Jesus  saith  to  him , Have  / been  so  long  time — three  years 
and  a half — conversing  with  you  I have  taught  you  who  I am,  and  yet 
ye  have  not  known  Mel  The  Greek  S.  Chrysostom  and  S.  Cyril 
make  thou  hast  not  known  Me  in  the  sing.,  that  indeed  I am  not  only 
man,  but  the  Son  of  God  ; not  diverse  in  essence  and  existence  from 
Him,  but  Consubstantial  with  God  the  Father.  For  therefore  having 
seen  Me,  you  still  desire  to  see  the  Father,  because  you  think  that 
I have  a nature  wholly  different  from  the  Father.  As  though 
Philip  said,  I have  seen  Jesus  the  Son  of  God  : it  remains  for  me  to 
see  His  Father,  as  being  different  from  Him,  as  is  the  case  with 
men.  This  was  the  root  of  Philip’s  mistake,  which  Christ  removes 
by  what  follows. 

Philip , he  that  seeih  Me , seeth,  &c.  “ Since  I and  the  Father  are 

plainly  one  and  the  same  in  the  essence  of  Godhead — one,  I say,  not 
only  in  likeness,  but  one  indivisibly,  therefore  he  who  sees  Me  in  the 
Humanity  which  I have  assumed,  inasmuch  as  he  sees  Me,  sees  My 
Father  dlso,  for  land  My  Father  are  one”  Where  observe,  in  Christ 
the  Humanity  was  seen  per  se9  but  the  Godhead  per  accidens . For 
It  was  seen  not  as  It  is  in  Itself,  but  through  the  Humanity,  even  as 
the  soul  is  seen  by  means  of  the  body  in  which  it  moves  and  operates. 
Wherefore  he  who  with  his  bodily  eye  (with  regard  to  which  princi- 
pally Philip  asked,  and  Christ  answered)  beheld  this  Man,  namely 
Jesus,  per  sc,  beheld  indirectly,  and  per  accidens  His  Godhead, 
because  this  Man  was  truly  God.  I am  speaking  as  regards  the 
essence  of  the  Godhead,  which  is  common  to  the  Father  and  the 
Son.  For  as  regards  Person,  it  was  indeed  the  Person  of  the  Son 
which  assumed  human  nature,  not  the  Person  of  the  Father. 
Wherefore  he  who  directly  saw  this  Man  (Christ),  directly  saw  the 
Person  of  God  the  Son  lying  hid  in  the  manhood,  but  not  the 
Person  of  God  the  Father,  except  by  concomitance,  as  I shall  show 
in  ver.  io.  Wherefore  he  who  sees  or  recognises  the  Godhead  of  the 
Son,  recognises  also  the  Godhead  of  the  Father,  because  They  are 


zed  by 


Google 


TO  SEE  CHRIST  IS  TO  SEE  THE  FATHER. 


89 


one  and  the  same.  So  S.  Augustine,  Cyril,  Chrysostom,  Hilary, 
and  other  Fathers  passim . From  this  passage  they  prove  against 
the  Arians,  1.  That  Jesus  was  really  God,  so  that  those  who  saw 
that  Man  likewise  saw  God.  2.  That  there  was  one  Person  of  the 
Father,  another  of  the  Son,  which  the  Sabellians  denied.  For 
diversity  of  Persons  is  denoted  by  the  words  Me  and  Father . 
3.  That  the  Son  is  Con  substantial  with  the  Father.  For  unless 
They  were  Consubstantial,  the  Son  might  be  seen  without  seeing 
the  Father  : and  vice  versa , the  Father  might  be  seen  without  behold- 
ing the  Son,  even  as  happens  with  men.  “You  err  therefore,  O 
Philip,  when  having  seen  Me,  you  desire  to  see  the  Father,  as  though 
you  were  about  to  see  another  God,  and  another  Deity,  when  there 
is  but  one  and  the  same.  How  then  sayest  thou,  Show  us  the  Father \ 
when  I have  shown  Him  unto  thee  in  Myself?  ” 

This  is  the  true  sense  in  which  Christ  answers  directly  the  question 
and  meaning  of  Philip.  But  because  Christ,  taking  occasion,  as  He 
is  wont,  from  the  question  to  rise  and  to  carry  His  hearers  with  Him 
to  a loftier  height,  this  passage  may,  as  to  its  second  intention,  be 
taken  to  apply  to  the  perfect  and  proper  cognition  of  the  Father  and 
the  Son,  whether  by  faith  or  by  sight  As  it  were,  He  who  seeth 
Me  according  to  the  Divinity,  seeth  also  the  Father.  Because, 
although  He  is  distinct  from  Me,  yet  am  I in  Him  and  He  in  Me 
by  identity  of  nature.  Wherefore  He  who  sees,  i.e.  who  believes, 
that  I am  the  Son  of  God,  also  sees,  i.e.  believes,  that  God  is  my 
Father.  And  he  who  through  the  beatific  vision  intuitively  beholds 
Me,  intuitively  beholds  the  Father  also.  So  S.  Cyril,  Augustine, 
Chrysostom,  Maldonatus,  and  others.  Also  Suarez,  who  shows  from 
this  passage  that  the  Blessed  who  see  the  Divine  Essence  see  also 
Three  Persons  in  It. 

Ver.  10. — Believe  ye  not  that  I am  in  the  Father , &c.  Observe 
1.  Here  again  the  distinction  of  the  Divine  Persons  is  signified. 
Nor  is  any  one  properly  said  to  be  in  himself,  but  in  another.  2. 
The  oneness  of  the  Divine  Nature  is  signified.  For  because  the 
Father  and  the  Son  are,  and  exist  in  one  and  the  same  Divine 
Nature,  therefore  the  Father  is  in  the  Son,  and  the  Son  in  the 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


90 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIV. 


Father.  Christ  proved  this  by  the  effect.  For  He  had  His  doctrine 
and  works  from  the  Father,  and  common  with  the  Father.  There- 
fore He  had  the  same  common  Nature  with  Him.  Hence,  3. 
By  this  saying  is  consequently  signified  the  perfect  and  intimate 
union  and  indwelling  of  one  Divine  person  in  the  Other,  and  the 
converse.  By  which  it  comes  to  pass  that  the  Father  is  in  the  Son 
and  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Son  in  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost, 
the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  Father  and  the  Son.  Damascene  (/.  de 
Fid \ c.  11)  calls  this,  v and  from  him  the  schoolmen  call 
it  circumincessio . Concerning  which  mystery  S.  Augustine  treats 
(/.  6,  de  Trim  c.  ult)  and  S.  Hilary  (lib.  4,  de  Trim)  Each 
one  of  the  Divine  Persons  is  in  each  of  the  others,  not  only  as 
regards  Their  Essence,  but  also  as  regards  Their  relation  and 
proper  Person,  because  all  are  most  intimately  conjoined  and 
united  with  One  Another.  Whence  it  follows  that  he  who  fully 
knows  and  beholds  one  Divine  Person — as,  for  example,  the  Son 
— as  the  Blessed  see  Him,  not  only  sees  the  Godhead  common  to 
the  Father  and  the  Son,  but  sees  also  the  very  Person  of  the 
Father,  both  because  the  Person  of  the  Father  is  most  intimately 
related  to  the  Person  of  the  Son,  and  also  because  in  that  relation- 
ship is  included  the  essential  order.  For  it  is  the  Father  who  of 
His  Essence  begetteth  the  Son.  And  this  is  what  Christ  here 
means  when  He  saith,  Believe  ye  not  that  I am  in  the  Father \ and 
the  Father  in  Me  ? 

The  words  which  I speak,  &c.  They  are  not  human  but  Divine 
words.  They  proceed  not  from  My  Humanity,  but  from  My 
Divinity,  which  I have  received  of  the  Father.  Wherefore  whoso 
heareth  Me  speak,  heareth  not  so  much  Me  as  God  the  Father 
speaking  in  Me  and  by  Me.  Observe,  the  Godhead  common  to  the 
Father  and  the  Son  was  the  efficient  cause  of  the  Divine  words 
which  Christ  uttered.  Yet  the  thing  signified  by  the  words  was 
often  peculiar  to  the  Person  of  the  Son,  not  of  the  Father,  as  when 
He  said,  “I  am  the  Son  of  God,”  “I  have  taken  flesh,”  “The 
things  which  I say  and  do  I have  received  of  the  Father.”  For  these 
things  He  said  concerning  Himself,  not  the  Father,  as  is  plain. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  FATHER  IS  IN  THE  SON. 


91 


For  not  the  Father  was  made  man,  but  the  Son.  And  yet  the 
Father  equally  with  the  Son  was  the  efficient  cause  as  well  of  the 
Incarnation,  as  of  the  words  uttered  by  the  Word  Incarnate.  For 
the  works  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  ad  extra , as  theologians  say,  are 
undivided,  and  common  to  all  the  Three  Divine  Persons. 

But  the  Father  abiding  in  Me , &c.  The  Father , as  the  prime 
source  not  only  of  creatures,  but  of  the  other  Divine  Persons,  that 
is,  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  For  when  the  Father  by  begetting 
communicated  His  Divinity  to  the  Son,  He  communicated  also 
His  omnipotence,  virtue,  and  power  of  working.  Wherefore,  if  not 
the  Son  but  the  Father  Himself  had  assumed  Humanity,  He  would 
have  spoken  and  done  the  self-same  things  which  the  Son  spoke 
and  did.  For  the  Father  both  spoke  and  wrought  in  the  Son : and 
also  there  is  one  Godhead  and  omnipotence  of  the  Father  and  the 
Son,  which  spoke  and  wrought  all  things  through  the  Humanity  whidh 
He  assumed.  Wherefore  Christ  left  it  to  be  gathered  by  the 
Apostles  that  when  they  saw  and  heard  Him  speaking  they  were 
to  think  that  they  saw  and  heard  the  Father.  “From  these  My 
words  and  deeds,”  as  Ribera  paraphrases,  “ ye  are  able  to  understand 
how  good  My  Father  is,  how  kind,  how  much  He  loves  you.  From 
My  miracles  ye  may  know  My  omnipotence,  and  that  I know  all 
things,  and  have  in  Me  all  good.  From  whence  ye  understand 
that  the  Father  likewise  hath  the  same.  And  since  these  external 
things  lead  you  to  the  knowledge  of  such  great  good  things,  what, 
think  ye,  will  be  yours  when  ye  shall  behold  My  and  the  Father’s 
Essence  without  glass,  or  figure?” 

Ver.  11,  12. — Believe  ye  not  that  I am  in  the  Father  l & c.  For 
believe  ye  not  l the  Greek  has  marsvert  pot,  Believe  Me.  But  the 
meaning  is  the  same,  and  one  includes  the  other.  Believe  ye  not 
that  I am  in  the  Father,  & c.  i.e.,  “ Believe,  because  I assert  this 
to  you.”  “ But  if  ye  do  not  believe  this  simply  on  My  assertion, 
at  least  believe  on  account  of  the  works  themselves,  because  the 
Father  by  working  in  Me  and  by  Me  so  many  and  so  great  miracles, 
shows  by  those  very  works  that  He  dwelleth  in  Me,  and  doeth  by 
Me  such  mighty  things.” 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


X 


92  S.  JOHN,  C.  XIV. 

Amen , Amen , / jary  unto  you , whoso  believeth  in  Me,  &c.  Christ 
wishes  to  prove  that  He  is  in  the  Father,  and  the  Father  in  Him. 
The  force  of  the  argument  stands  thus  : he  that  believeth  that  the 
Father  is  in  Me,  by  this  faith,  or  by  the  power  and  virtue  of  this 
faith,  shall  do  similar  Divine  works  and  miracles  to  those  which 
I do ; yea,  he  shall  do  greater  than  I do.  Therefore  that  faith  must 
needs  be  true,  which  believes  that  the  Father  is  in  Me,  and  worketh 
in  Me.  For  the  Father  worketh  by  true  faith,  and  by  miraculous 
works  affords  to  such  an  one  testimony  of  the  truth,  but  not  to  a 
false  faith,  for  otherwise,  He  who  is  the  prime  Verity  would  be  a 
witness  and  approver  of  a lie. 

And  greater  works , &c.  Not  every  believer,  but  some  of  them, 
such  as  the  Apostles  and  apostolic  men. 

What  were  these  greater  works  ? i.  Origen  (Horn.  7,  in  JVum.) 
thinks  that  such  things  are  meant  as  feeble  men  overcoming  the 
flesh,  the  world,  and  the  devil.  For,  saith  he,  it  is  a greater  thing 
that  Christ  should  overcome  in  us,  than  that  He  should  overcome 
in  Himself. 

2.  S.  Chrysostom  thinks  that  the  greater  works  were  such  as  that 
Peter  should  heal  the  sick  by  his  shadow,  which  Christ  did  not  do. 

3.  And  better : S.  Augustine  thinks  that  these  greater  works  were 
the  conversion  of  all  the  nations  of  the  whole  world  by  twelve  Apostles. 
For  Christ  converted  a far  less  number,  or  only  about  500.  Listen 
to  S.  Augustine,  whose  diffuse  words  I have  contracted  into  a few  : 
“What  are  those  greater  works?  Are  they  perchance  such  as 
that  Peter  healed  by  his  shadow?  For  it  is  a greater  thing  to  be 
healed  by  one’s  shadow  than  by  the  fringe  of  one’s  garment  But 
when  He  said  those  things  He  was  referring  to  the  works  of  His 
words.  When  He  said,  The  Father  abiding  in  Me , He  doeth  the 
works , He  called  the  words  which  He  spoke  works , the  fruit  of  which 
was  their  faith.  For  when  His  disciples  preached  the  Gospel,  not 
merely  a few  in  number  like  themselves,  but  nations  believed.  The 
rich  man  departed  from  the  Lord  sorrowful.  Yet  afterwards  what 
that  one  man  would  not  do,  many  did  when  He  spake  by  His  disciples. 
‘Then  he  speaks  of  a marvellous  paradox.’  I say  that  herein  is 


Digitized  by 


Google 


“GREATER  WORKS.”  93 

something  greater  than  to  create  the  heavens  and  the  earth.  For 
these  shall  pass  away,  but  the  salvation  and  justification  of  the  elect 
shall  endure.  There  are  also  in  heaven  the  angels  who  are  the  work 
of  Christ.  And  although  it  be  an  equal  display  of  power  to  create 
them  and  to  justify  the  ungodly,  yet  is  this  latter  a greater  work  of 
mercy.  However,  there  is  no  need  to  understand  all  the  works  of 
Christ  when  He  saith,  greater  works  shall  he  do . For  perchance  He 
spoke  of  those  which  He  was  then  doing.  Now  it  is  a less  thing  to 
preach  the  words  of  justice  which  He  did  for  our  sake  than  it  is  to 
justify  the  ungodly,  and  this  He  so  works  in  us  that  we  work  also.” 

You  will  ask  why  Christ  willed  to  do  greater  works  by  the  Apostles 
than  by  Himself.  I reply,  i.  Because  He  wished  the  faith  in  Him 
to  be  gradually  disseminated,  and  thus  to  grow,  lest  if  it  should 
grow  up  suddenly  it  should  be  supposed  to  be  fancy,  and  He 
Himself  a magician,  or  impostor.  For  that  which  grows  by  degrees, 
by  degrees  gains  confidence,  and  is  more  durable. 

2.  That  the  modesty  as  well  as  the  power  of  Jesus  might  be  com- 
mended. That  it  might  be  seen  that  He  was  not  only  mighty  in 
Himself  to  work,  but  that  He  was  able  to  infuse  the  same  powers  of 
working  in  an  equal,  and  even  in  a greater  degree,  into  His  Apostles. 
For  the  Apostles  did  not  do  these  works  by  their  own  power,  but  by 
Christ’s. 

3.  Because  it  behoved  Christ  first  to  suffer  and  to  die,  and  by  His 
death  to  merit  those  wonderful  works,  which  afterwards  He  wrought 
by  His  Apostles. 

4.  Because  it  behoved  Christ  first  to  rise  and  ascend  into  Heaven, 
and  then  to  send  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  should  work  such  great 
miracles.  This  reason  Christ  adds,  when  He  says,  Because  I go  to 
the  Father. 

Let  prelates  and  superiors  here  learn  from  Christ  to  keep  for 
themselves  the  lower  and  meaner  offices,  and  to  leave  to  their 
inferiors  the  greater  and  more  honourable.  They  will  do  greater  things 
by  their  subjects  than  by  themselves.  For  what  the  subject  doeth,  the 
superior  is  considered  to  do  through  him.  S.  Ignatius,  the  Founder 
of  our  Society,  when  he  was  made  General,  publicly  catechised,  whilst 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


94  S.  JOHN,  C.  XIV. 

he  left  to  his  companions  under  him  the  honour  of  filling  notable 
pulpits. 

Because  I go  to  the  Father . When  after  death  I have  obtained  the 
victory,  and  have  triumphed  over  the  world,  the  devil,  and  hell,  I 
will  ascend  in  glory  to  the  Father’s  throne,  and  thenceforward  I will, 
through  you,  show  forth  greater  works  than  I did  whilst  I was  yet 
struggling  in  this  life.  There  is  no  reason  why  I should  then  veil 
my  face  in  poverty  and  humility,  as  I have  done  when  I willed  to 
submit  to  My  Passion  for  the  redemption  of  mankind.  That  being 
accomplished,  I shall  go  up  to  My  Father,  who  wills  that  My  Name 
shall  be  manifested  and  adored  in  all  the  world  by  the  preaching  of 
the  Apostles.  Wherefore  He  will  work  greater  things  by  them  than 
He  wrought  by  Me  in  this  life.  So  S.  Cyril  {lib.  ix . c.  41). 

Ver.  13. — And  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  the  Father , &c.  Thus  it  is  in 
the  Latin,  and  in  S.  Chrysostom,  Cyril,  and  others.  But  in  the  Greek, 
Arabic,  and  Syriac  the  word  Father  is  omitted.  These  words  have 
reference  to  what  preceded,  and  greater  works  shall  he  do,  &c.  For 
after  the  faith,  concerning  which  He  said  in  the  preceding  verse,  he 
that  believeth  in  Me,  He  here  subjoins  a profession  of  faith,  and  the 
invocation  of  His  Name,  and  the  asking  for  those  greater  things. 
As  though  He  said,  “ I indeed,  O ye  Apostles,  am  going  away  from 
you  to  the  Father,  but  instead  of  My  presence  I leave  and  give  you 
the  invocation  of  My  Name,  that  by  means  of  It  ye  may  ask  and 
obtain  those  greater  things.  Wherefore  Christ,  says  Cyril,  here 
signifies  that  His  own  Divinity  and  authority  is  the  same  as  the 
Father’s.  For  it  is  the  glory  of  the  Son  that  by  the  invocation  of 
Him  the  Father  should  give  to  the  Apostles  to  do  greater  works 
than  He  wrought  by  the  Son  during  His  earthly  life. 

In  My  Name,  i.e.  by  the  invocation  of  My  Name. 

I will  do  it.  I will  cause  that  the  Father  will  grant  unto  you. 
Yea,  I in  the  Father  and  with  the  Father  will  do  this  thing,  and  will 
grant  it  to  you,  so  that  all  the  power,  virtue,  and  glory  of  these  greater 
works  which  ye  will  do  shall  be  ascribed  to  Me,  not  to  you.  For 
when  prayer  is  made  to  the  Father,  prayer  is  also  made  to  the  Son. 

That  the  Father  may  be  glorified  in  the  Son.  Christ  out  of  modesty 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


CHRIST  ALWAYS  PRESENT. 


95 


is  wont  to  ascribe  all  His  glory  to  the  Father,  as  to  the  prime  Fount 
and  origin.  Learn  from  hence  that  miracles  must  not  be  asked  for 
except  for  God’s  glory,  or  when  the  glory  of  God  requires  them. 

Ver.  14. — If  ye  shall  ask  anything  in  My  Name,  I will  do  it.  What 
Christ  in  the  last  verse  said  of  the  Father  He  here  says  of  Himself, 
that  He  may  show  that  He  is  the  same  God  with  the  Father,  that 
He  hears  those  who  pray  to  Him,  and  that  He  doeth  all  things 
which  the  Father  doeth.  Whence  S.  Cyril  asserts  that  Christ  is  here 
speaking  of  His  Divinity.  Some  are  of  opinion  that  the  same  thing 
is  spoken  and  confirmed  which  He  had  said  in  the  verse  preceding. 
Wherefore  Chrysostom  and  Nonnus  omit  this  verse.  But  it  is  found 
in  the  Arabic,  Syriac,  S.  Augustine,  S.  Cyril,  Theophylact,  &c. 

But  Toletus  and  others,  with  better  reason,  think  that  something 
different  is  meant  from  the  verse  preceding.  They  think  that  the 
words  of  the  former  verse  relate  to  the  petition  for  the  greater 
things  : but  that  in  this  verse  Christ  says  that  He  will  hear  particular 
prayers.  He  means  that  although  He  is  going  away  to  the  Father, 
and  will  be  absent  in  the  body,  yet  He  is  always  present,  and  will 
hear  their  prayers,  and  help  their  necessities,  so  that  whatsoever  they 
ask  in  His  name,  i.e.,  through  His  merits,  He  will  do  for  them.  S. 
Augustine  supposes  an  objection.  S.  Paul  asked  that  the  angel  of 
Satan  might  depart  from  him,  but  received  it  not.  But  consider  that 
it  is  said,  In  My  Name,  i.e.  in  Jesus  ! For  whatever  we  ask  contrary 
to  our  salvation,  we  do  not  ask  in  the  name  of  the  Saviour.  For  He 
would  not  be  a Saviour  to  a man,  if  He  did  anything  to  hinder  his 
salvation.  The  physician  knows  what  is  against  his  patient’s  health, 
and  what  is  in  favour  of  it : and  therefore  he  does  not  comply  with 
his  wishes  in  what  is  against  his  recovery. 

Ver.  15. — If  ye  love  Me,  & c.  Christ  here  takes  His  farewell  of  His 
disciples,  gives  His  last  commands,  which  pertain  to  the  exercise  of 
the  three  chief  theological  virtues,  faith,  hope,  and  charity.  Con- 
cerning faith  He  speaks  in  the  1st  verse,  Ye  believe  in  God,  &c. 
Concerning  hope  in  the  3d,  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask,  &c.  Now  He 
speaks  of  charity,  If  you  love  Me,  keep  My  commandments.  And 
these  three  are  united  together.  For  faith  begets  hope,  and  hope 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


96 


S.  JOHN,  c.  XIV. 


begets  charity.  The  meaning  then  is,  If  ye  wish  to  obtain  these 
My  promises,  and  to  gain  what  ye  ask  in  My  name,  then  love  Me  in 
return  who  love  you,  and  persevere  and  grow  in  My  love.  If  ye  wish 
to  please  Me,  and  through  Me  obtain  all  that  ye  ask,  keep  My  com- 
mandments. And  if  they  do  this,  He  promises  them  a great  reward, 
saying, 

Ver.  1 6. — And  I will  ask  the  Father , If  ye  persevere  in  My 

love,  and  keep  My  commandments,  I will  obtain  for  you  by  My 
prayers  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  the  Father  will  pour  upon  you  at 
Pentecost.  And  He  will  work  through  you  even  greater  things  than 
I have  wrought. 

And  I will  ask , as  man.  For  Christ  as  man  prays  for  us,  says  S. 
Augustine. 

Another  Comforter , i.e.  another  than  Myself.  From  hence  it  is 
plain  that  Christ  also  was  the  Paraclete  of  the  Apostles  and  the 
faithful.  That  is,  He  is — i.  an  Advocate,  an  Intercessor,  according  to 
those  words  of  Paul,  “We  have  an  Advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus 
Christ  the  righteous.”  2.  An  Exhorter,  an  Inciter.  3.  A Com* 
forter,  as  the  Syriac  translates.  All  these  meanings  are  included  in  the 
Greek  cra^axXijroc.  But  when  Christ  went  away  He  sent  another 
Paraclete,  even  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  in  these  three  things  took 
Christ’s  place.  For,  1.  He  is  the  Advocate  of  the  faithful,  “Who 
intercedes  for  us  with  groanings  unutterable  ” (Rom.  viii.  26).  He 
likewise  is  our  Exhorter  and  Consoler.  To  these  two  offices  Christ 
here  specially  refers.  As  though  He  said,  I,  O ye  disciples,  have 
taught  you  until  this  present ; I have  called  you,  and  comforted  you, 
and  you  are  very  sad  on  account  of  My  near  departure.  But  lift  up 
your  minds  and  trust.  For  I will  send  you  another  Comforter  in 
My  place,  who  will  teach,  console,  and  protect  you,  not  for  a little 
while,  but  all  through  your  life.  The  Holy  Spirit  then  is  this  Para- 
clete, i.e.,  1.  An  Exhorter,  an  Inciter,  because  He  stirred  up  the 
Apostles  to  undertake  noble  works  of  virtue  for  the  glory  of  God, 
that  they  should  preach  the  Gospel  throughout  the  whole  world,  not 
fearing  tyrants  or  tortures,  yea,  being  ambitious  of  the  most  dread- 
ful deaths  for  Christ’s  sake.  2.  A Consoler,  because  He  would 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  COMFORTER. 


97 


comfort  and  support  them  in  adversities,  distresses,  doubts  and 
temptations.  For  the  Holy  Spirit  is  as  it  were  a burning  and 
shining  fire,  which  drives  all  darkness,  fear,  and  torpor  from  the 
mind  As  S.  Bernard  says  ( Serm . 2,  de.  Pent.),  “ Those  whom  He 
fills,  He  makes  to  be  fervent  in  spirit,  and  to  have  knowledge  of  the 
truth.”  And  again,  “ The  Paraclete  gives  the  pledge  of  salvation,  the 
light  of  knowledge ; and  the  strength  of  life,- — that  what  is  impossible 
by  nature  should  be  made  possible,  yea  easy,  by  grace.” 

He  will  give  you,  O ye  Apostles,  at  the  next  Pentecost.  From 
hence  S.  Jerome  ( Quces . 9,  ad  Hedib.)  refutes  the  heresy  of 
Mon  tan  us,  whom  Tertullian  followed,  who  said  that  long  after  the 
Apostles  the  Holy  Ghost  first  came  down  upon  the  heresiarch  Mon- 
tanus,  a.d.  220,  and  therefore  that  Montanus  was  the  Paraclete 
promised  by  Christ. 

That  He  may  abide  with  you  for  ever . From  this  promise  of 
Christ  it  is  that  the  Holy  Ghost  always  abides  in  the  Church,  and 
assists  the  faithful,  so  as  to  be  a Comforter  in  afflictions,  and  a 
stirrer-up  to  heroic  works  of  virtue.  S.  Augustine  proposes  the 
objection,  “ How  shall  we  keep  the  commandments,  that  we  may 
receive  Him,  when,  unless  we  do  possess  Him,  we  cannot  keep 
them  ? ” He  answers,  “ He  who  loveth  hath  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  by 
having  Him  deserves  to  have  more  of  Him,  that  by  having  more  of 
Him,  he  may  love  more.” 

The  Spirit  of  Truth . Why  is  the  Holy  Ghost  called  the  Spirit  of 
Truth  ? First,  S.  Cyril  answers,  because  He  is  the  Spirit  of  the  Son, 
proceeding  by  Spiration  from  the  Son,  whose  special  attributes  are 
wisdom  and  truth,  according  to  the  words,  / am  the  way , the  truth, 
and  the  life . 

2.  Because  the  Holy  Ghost  has  declared  to  the  world  that  Jesus 
is  God,  and  the  Son  of  God,  the  Messiah  and  Saviour.  For  this 
was  what  Christ  pressed  home,  saying,  Philip,  he  that  seeth  Me, 
seeth  the  Father  also.  And  I am  in  the  Father,  and  the  Father  in 
Me.  So  S.  Basil  (lib.  2,  de  Spirit  Sane.  c.  18). 

3.  Euthymius  says,  He  is  called  the  Spirit  of  Truth,  i.e.,  most 

vol.  v.  G 


Digitized  by  L.ooQle 


98  S.  JOHN,  C.  XTV. 

true  and  excellent,  as  opposed  to  an  angel,  the  soul,  or  wind,  which 
are  spirits  in  a sense. 

4.  Of  truth , because  He  is  worthy  of  credit,  says  S.  Chrysostom. 

5.  Others  say  that  the  Spirit  of  Truth  means  that  He  is  the 
Spirit  of  the  New  Testament.  For  to  it  was  the  Holy  Ghost 
reserved,  as  the  Spirit  of  liberty  and  love,  whereas  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment He  was  the  Spirit  of  bondage  and  fear. 

6.  And  most  plainly,  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  Spirit  of  Truth , 
because  He  is  the  Author  of  all  truth,  and  the  alone  Teacher  and 
Giver  of  pure  and  perfect  truth.  He  teaches  us  all  truths  necessary 
for  salvation,  and  delivers  us  from  all  errors.  And  so  Christ  explains 
this  to  us,  saying  in  the  1 6th  chapter,  “ When  He,  the  Spirit  of 
Truth,  is  come,  He  shall  teach  you  all  truth.”  So  too  in  Isa.  xi.  2, 
the  same  Spirit  is  called  “ the  Spirit  of  wisdom  and  counsel,”  &c, 
because  He  inspires  us  with  those  virtues. 

The  Spirit  of  Truth  therefore  is  opposed  to  the  evil  spirit  of  the 
world,  which  is  false  and  deceitful.  Wherefore  Christ  adds,  whom 
the  world  cannot  receive . Whence  S.  Augustine  (lib.  de  grat . Nov \ 
Test.)  says  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  soul  of  the  Church.  “ The 
Holy  Spirit  is  the  love  and  bond  of  union  of  the  Father  and  the 
Son.  To  Him  pertains  the  Society  by  which  we  are  made  one.  A 
man’s  body  consists  of  many  members,  and  one  soul  animates  them 
all,  causing  the  eye  to  see,  and  the  ear  to  hear.  So  likewise  the 
Holy  Ghost  contains  and  animates  the  members  of  the  Body  of 
Christ  which  is  the  Church.” 

Whom  the  world  cannot  receive , i.e.  worldly  and  carnal  men,  who 
gape  after  earthly  desires  and  vain  riches.  Such  persons  cannot  re- 
ceive the  Holy  Ghost,  because  He  is  altogether  heavenly,  spiritual,  and 
Divine,  who  teaches  us  to  despise  all  earthly  things  as  vanity,  and 
to  love  and  embrace  heavenly  things  as  true  and  solid.  For  as  the 
Apostle  says  (Rom.  viii.),  “ The  prudence  of  the  flesh  is  the  enemy  of 
God.”  ( Vulg ;)  Whence  S.  Basil  says  (lib.  de  Spir.  Sc.),  “As  in 
an  unpolished  mirror  the  images  of  things  cannot  be  received  nor 
discerned,  so  cannot  a man  receive  the  illumination  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  unless  he  cast  away  sin  and  fleshly  lusts.” 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


CHRIST  WILL  COME. 


99 


Because  it  seetli  Him  not,  &c.  Because  it  hath  the  eyes  of  the 
mind  earthly,  and  blinded  by  the  lusts  of  the  flesh.  Wherefore  neither 
doth  it  know  Him,  i.e.  practically,  so  as  to  love  and  desire  Him. 

But  ye  shall  know  Him , &c.  Know,  i.e.  His  power,  efficiency, 
doctrine,  holiness.  For  He  by  His  presence  in  you  shall  exercise 
His  Divine  power  and  grace.  By  which  it  shall  come  to  pass  that 
ye  shall  know  Him,  love  Him  when  known,  and  long  that  He  may 
be  known  to  others.  It  is  as  the  taste  of  pepper  when  it  is  bruised,  or 
as  the  hidden  power  of  fire  in  wood,  which  bursts  forth  into  a mighty 
conflagration. 

Shall  abide  with  you.  The  Vulg.,  with  S.  Augustine  and  Nonnus, 
reads  *(/  in  the  fut.  The  Greek  with  a different  accent  has  (ihu, 
abides . With  this  agree  the  Syriac  and  Theophylact  Listen  to  S. 
Bernard  ( Serm . 20,  inter  Parv.),  “The  Holy  Ghost  proceeds,  breathes, 
inhabits,  fills,  glorifies.  He  is  said  to  proceed  in  two  ways ,from 
whence , and  whither.  From  whence?  From  the  Father  and  the 
Son.  Whither  ? To  the  creature.  By  proceeding  He  predestinates. 
By  breathing  He  calls  those  whom  He  has  predestinated.  By  in- 
habiting He  justifies  those  whom  He  has  called.  By  filling  He 
heaps  merits  upon  those  whom  He  has  justified.  By  glorifying  He 
enriches  with  rewards  those  upon  whom  He  has  accumulated  merits.” 

Ver.  18. — I will  not  leave  you  orphans , &c.  Forasmuch  as  Christ 
called  His  disciples  sons , He  now  says  to  them,  1 will  not  leave  you 
orphans,  i.e.  without  a Father.  Because,  although  I am  going  away 
from  you  to  the  Father,  I will  send  you  another  Comforter  in  My 
stead.  It  is  not  that  going  away  I will  desert  you,  but  that  going 
away  I will  return,  and  will  come  unto  you. 

Christ  did  this — 1.  And  especially,  when  after  the  resurrection  He 
appeared  to  His  apostles  in  bodily  presence,  and  taught  them,  and  made 
them  glad.  2.  He  did  it,  when  at  Pentecost  He  visibly  sent  them  the 
Holy  Ghost  in  the  appearance  of  tongues  of  fire.  3.  He  did  it  invisibly, 
by  often  spiritually  visiting  them  from  heaven,  and  communicating 
to  them  His  heavenly  gifts.  4.  He  will  do  it  visibly  in  the  day  of 
judgment  when  He  will  make  His  Apostles  assessors  with  Himself. 
All  this  Christ  further  explains  in  what  follows. 


Digitized  by  CnOOQle 


IOO 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIV. 


Ver.  19. — Yet  a little  while , &c  But  a short  period  of  life  lemains 
to  Me,  only  a few  hours,  after  which  I shall  die  upon  the  cross,  and 
be  withdrawn  from  this  world ; but  ye  shall  see  Me,  because  the 
third  day  I shall  rise  from  the  dead,  and  show  Myself  to  you.  This 
is  the  literal  meaning. 

Tropologically,  as  the  world  shall  not  see  Me  with  the  eye  of 
sense,  so  neither  shall  it  see  Me  with  the  eye  of  the  mind,  because 
it  will  not  believe  in  Me,  nor  recognise  Me  as  the  Messiah. 

Analogically.  The  world  shall  not  see  Me  after  the  day  of  judg- 
ment gloriously  reigning  in  heaven. 

Because  I live,  ye  shall  live  also . Ye  shall  see  Me,  because  I shall 
rise  from  the  dead,  and  live  again.  Ye  also  shall  live  that  ye  may 
behold  Me  living  again,  that  ye  may  be  able  to  preach  My  death 
and  resurrection  to  the  whole  world.  As  Theophylact  says,  When 
ye  shall  see  Me  living  again  ye  shall  rejoice,  and  as  though  ye 
had  been  dead,  ye  shall  live  again  at  My  appearing.  As  Jacob, 
when  he  heard  that  Joseph  whom  he  supposed  to  be  dead  was  alive, 
he  awoke,  as  it  were  out  of  a deep  sleep,  and  lived  again.  Christ 
speaks  in  the  present  tense,  I live,  because  He  would  signify  that 
He  would  immediately  rise  again  from  the  dead.  As  S.  Augustine 
says,  “ He  spoke  of  Himself  as  living,  in  the  present,  of  them  as  about 
to  live  in  the  future.  For  His  Resurrection  was  presently  to  take 
place,  but  theirs  was  to  be  deferred  to  the  end  of  the  world.” 

Ver.  20. — In  that  day  ye  shall  know  that  1 am  in  My  Father , &c. 
After  I have  risen  again,  and  ascended  into  heaven,  and  sent  you 
the  Holy  Ghost,  ye  shall  by  His  illumination  know  these  three  things 
more  clearly  and  certainly,  viz.,  that  I am  in  the  Father,  by  the  unity 
of  the  Divine  Essence,  that  is  to  say,  that  I am  true  God.  2. 
That  ye  may  be  in  Me  through  Love,  through  the  special  guardian- 
ship which  I have  over  you.  Cyril  adds  a deeper  meaning,  “That 
ye  may  be  in  Me  through  union  of  substance.  For  since  I have 
assumed  human  flesh,  I have  united  the  whole  nature  of  man,  and 
as  it  were  all  men  to  Myself  3.  That  I may  be  in  you  as  inhabit- 
ing, illuminating,  and  directing  you  to  all  good,  and  to  everlasting 
life  in  heaven  by  My  grace.  Wherefore,  says  the  Interlinear,  ye 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  KEEPING  CHRIST’S  WORD. 


T 01 


shall  know  that  1 am  in  the  Father , as  a ray  of  light  in  the  sun,  one 
with  Him,  and  ye  in  Me  as  branches  in  the  vine,  and  / in  you , as 
the  vine  in  a branch,  causing  (heavenly)  sap,  and  the  life  of  grace  to 
flow  into  you.  S.  Hilary  adds  that  Christ  is  in  us  in  the  way  of  food 
by  participation  of  the  Eucharist. 

He  that  hath  My  commandment 's,  &c.  As  the  Gloss  says,  not  only 
you,  O ye  Apostles,  but  every  one  who  loveth  Me,  and  keepeth  My 
commandments,  shall  live  and  know.  Toletus  understands  this  of 
the  ordinary  believers,  who  besides  the  Apostles  in  the  time  of 
Christ  believed  on  Him,  that  these  were  here  exhorted  to  persevere 
in  His  faith,  love,  and  obedience.  That  in  so  doing  they  would  in 
return  be  loved  by  Him  and  the  Father,  and  that  He  would  show 
Himself  to  them,  when  He  rose  again  gloriously  from  the  dead. 
This  meaning  is  true,  but  too  restricted.  For  Christ  is  speaking  to 
all  the  faithful  of  every  age.  The  meaning  is,  he  that  hath  My 
commandments,  i.e.  he  who  keeps  in  his  memory  and  affection  the 
precepts  which  he  has  heard  of  Me,  and  keepeth  them,  i.e.  fulfils 
them  in  deed ; he  who,  as  S.  Augustine  says,  keeps  them  in  his  life 
and  in  his  works,  and  perseveres  in  so  doing,  he  it  is  who  loveth  Me, 
because  he  does  what  is  pleasing  to  Me,  what  I love  and  desire  to  be 
done  by  him.  A similar  phrase  occurs  in  chap.  v.  38,  Ye  have  not 
My  word  abiding  in  you.  For  as  S.  Gregory  says,  “The  proof  of 
love  is  the  exhibition  of  work  The  love  of  God  is  never  lazy.  If 
it  exists,  it  worketh  great  things.  But  if  there  be  refusal  to  work, 
love  is  not  there.” 

But  he  that  loveth  Me,  &c  Because  My  commandments  are  the 
commandments  of  the  Father.  Wherefore  he  who  keepeth  them, 
reverences  and  loves  the  Father,  and  does  what  is  most  pleasing 
to  Him.  Hence  he  draws  His  love  upon  him  in  return.  Loving 
God  the  Father,  he  is  beloved  by  Him.  Love  is  the  magnet  of  love. 
But  here  observe,  we  do  not  first  love  God,  but  God  us,  and  so  He 
inspires  us  with  grace,  by  which  we  love  Him  in  return.  And  if  we 
accept  this  His  love,  and  begin  to  love  Him,  He  the  more  loves  us, 
and  pours  greater  grace  and  charity  upon  us. 

And  I will  love  him,  not  only  as  God,  for  so  I will  love  him  with 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


102 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIV. 


the  same  love  as  the  Father : but  even  as  man  I will  proceed  to  love 
him,  and  to  accumulate  gifts  and  graces  upon  him.  As  S.  Augustine 
says,  “ To  this  end  I will  love  that  I may  manifest  (Myself).  Not 
indeed  that  He  did  not  love  then.  He  loved  us  to  this  end,  that 
we  should  believe,  then  that  we  should  see.  Now  we  love  by 
believing  in  what  we  shall  see,  then  we  shall  love  by  seeing  that 
which  we  have  . believed.” 

And  will  manifest  Myself  to  him , by  a deeper  knowledge  from 
day  to  day  of  My  mysteries  and  gifts,  not  only  speculative  but 
practical  and  experimental  knowledge,  by  which  the  saints  taste 
and  have  experience  of  Christ  how  sweet  He,  the  Lord,  is  : and 
therefore  they  burst  forth  in  pious  affections  of  gratitude,  love,  and 
praise,  as  S.  Paul  does  in  i Cor.  n,  and  elsewhere.  But,  above 
all,  this  shall  take  place  in  heaven. 

Ver.  22. — Judas  saith  unto  him , &c.  This  was  Thaddseus,  the 
brother  of  James  the  less,  the  author  of  the  Epistle  of  Jude.  Where- 
fore is  it?  The  Vulg.  has  quid  factum?  which  is  a literal  rendering 
of  the  Hebrew  expression  me  haia%  Le.  why  was  it  ? When  Jesus 
said,  The  world  seeth  Me  not , hut  ye  see  Me>  He  spoke  of  His  death 
and  His  resurrection,  by  which  He  would  appear  again  to  His 
Apostles,  but  not  to  the  worldly  and  unbelieving  Jews.  But  Judas 
did  not  understand  these  words,  and  asked  that  they  might  be 
explained.  He  asks  the  reason,  says  S.  Augustine,  wherefore  He 
will  not  manifest  Himself  to  the  world,  but  only  to  His  own.  The 
Lord  answers  him,  Because  these  love,  but  the  others  do  not  love. 
Judas  uses  the  word  manifest , because  Christ  had  just  used  the  same 
expression,  saying,  1 will  manifest  Myself  to  him.  This  word  there- 
fore dwelt  in  Judas*  mind,  though  he  is  referring  to  previous  words 
of  Christ. 

Ver.  2$.— Jesus  answered , &c.  As  if  He  said,  “ Do  not  suppose, 
O Judas,  that  I will  appear  to  thee  alone  and  thy  fellow-Apostles 
after  My  resurrection,  as  if  the  fruit  of  My  life  and  passion  were 
restricted  to  you  only  and  the  few  others,  to  whom  I shall  visibly 
appear.  I shall  appear,  though  invisibly,  to  all  those  who  through- 
out the  world  shall  receive  My  faith  and  doctrine  by  means  of  the 


DigitizecT&y  Google  — 


PREPARATION  OF  CHRISTAS  SEAT.  tO$ 

preaching  of  thyself  and  the  rest  of  the  Apostles,  and  shall  love  and 
keep  it.” 

And  We  will  come  to  him , I and  My  Father,  and  consequently  the 
Holy  Ghost  For  where  there  is  one  Divine  Person  there  are  the 
other  two.  He  means,  Be  it  that  after  My  resurrection  I shall 
appear  visibly  to  you  alone,  invisibly  I shall  come  by  My  grace  to 
all  the  faithful  who  believe  in  Me.  And  as  I will  come,  so  also  My 
Father  and  the  Holy  Spirit  will  come  to  them.  And  we  will  dwell 
in  their  souls  as  in  our  house  and  temple. 

Observe,  God,  who  is  everywhere,  and  therefore  immovable,  is  said 
to  come  and  abide,  not  by  change  of  place,  but  by  the  fresh  working 
which  He  effects  in  such  and  such  a place.  So  He  is  here  said  to 
come  to  the  faithful  and  the  just  by  grace  and  a fresh  operation, 
because  He  preserves  them,  and  furthers  them  in  justice,  and  He  assists 
and  co-operates  with  their  own  freewill.  For  He  prevents  their  under- 
standing with  His  illumination,  and  their  will  by  pious  affections,  by 
which  He  impels  them  to  good  works,  even  such  as  are  arduous,  and 
by  His  concurring  grace  He  labours  with  them  for  this  accomplish- 
ment. 

Hear  S.  Augustine,  “ Love,  which  makes  men  to  dwell  with  one 
mind  in  a house,  separates  the  saints  from  the  world.  In  that 
house  the  Father  and  the  Son,  who  giveth  the  gift  of  love,  make 
their  dwelling-place.  They  come  to  us  whilst  we  come  to  them. 
They  come  by  assisting,  enlightening,  filling.  We  come  by  obey- 
ing, beholding,  receiving.” 

Lastly,  thus  piously  writes  S.  Bernard  ( Serm . 3,  de  Advent .), 
“ Blessed  is  he  with  whom  Thou  wilt  make  Thine  abode,  O Lord 
Jesu  ; blessed  is  he  in  whom  Wisdom  builds  herself  a house,  hewing 
out  her  seven  pillars;  blessed  is  the  soul  which  is  the  seat  of 
wisdom.  What  is  that  soul  ? It  is  the  soul  of  the  just.  Rightly 
so,  for  judgment  and  justice  are  the  preparation  of  Thy  seat  Who 
is  there  among  you,  brethren,  who  desires  to  prepare  in  his  soul 
a seat  for  Christ  ? Lo  1 what  are  the  silks,  the  tapestry,  the 
cushions,  which  ought  to  be  prepared?  Justice  and  judgment,  He 
says,  are  the  preparation  of  Thy  seat.  Justice  is  the  virtue  which 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


104 


S.  JOHN,  c.  XIV. 


is  His  very  own,  and  which  He  gives  to  each.  Render  thus  to 
each  of  the  three  classes  of  thy  superiors,  thy  equals,  thy  inferiors, 
what  is  due  to  each.  Thus  shalt  thou  worthily  celebrate  the  coining 
of  Christ,  and  prepare  His  seat  in  justice.” 

Tropologically,  God  the  Holy  Trinity  comes  to  the  three  faculties 
of  the  soul,  which  He  created  after  His  own  image,  that  He  may 
inhabit  them,  renewing  in  them  His  image  depraved  by  con- 
cupiscences. To  the  Father  is  appropriated  memory,  because  He 
from  fruitful  memory  conceiving  all  things,  produced  the  Word,  and 
begat  the  Son.  To  the  Son  is  appropriated  the  understanding, 
because  by  the  understanding  He  was  begotten,  as  it  were  the  word 
of  the  mind,  the  idea,  image  and  pattern  of  all  things.  To  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  appropriated  the  will,  because  He  Himself  proceeds 
by  the  action  of  the  will,  /.<?.,  the  love  of  the  Father  and  the  Son, 
as  it  were  the  love  and  bond  of  union  of  both.  The  Father  therefore 
reforms  the  memory  when  He  blots  out  of  it  the  appearances  of 
vanity,  and  brings  into  it  the  appearances  of  divine  things,  so  that 
it  should  remember  only  God,  His  worship  and  His  love.  The  Son 
reforms  the  understanding,  so  that  it  should  think  only  of  the  things 
which  pertain  to  salvation  and  holiness.  The  Holy  Spirit  reforms 
the  will,  so  that  it  should  love  and  desire  the  same.  Wherefore  a 
holy  soul  continually  reflects  that  it  is  a temple  of  the  Holy 
Trinity,  as  it  is  said  in  2 Cor.  vi.,  “ Ye  are  the  temple  of  the  living 
God.” 

There  were  in  the  ancient  Temple  three  vessels  of  service — the 
altar  for  burning  incense,  the  candelabrum  with  its  seven  burning 
lamps,  and  the  table  of  shewbread.  There  should  be  in  like  manner 
in  a holy  soul  an  altar  of  prayer,  breathing  out  holy  praises  and 
pious  desires  to  God.  There  ought  to  be  a candelabrum  brightly 
shining  with  the  seven  gifts  of  the  holy  Ghost.  And  there  ought 
to  be  a table  of  beneficence  and  charity.  Then  will  come  to  pass 
that  which  is  written  in  the  Apocalypse,  (xxi.  3),  “ Behold  the  taber- 
nacle of  God  is  with  men,  and  He  shall  dwell  with  them,  and  they 
shall  be  His  people,  and  God  Himself  with  them  shall  be 
their  God.”  See  S.  Bernard  (Serin.  27,  in  Cant.)  where  he  teaches 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  ILLUMINATION  OF  THE  HOLY  GHOST.  105 


that  a holy  soul  is  a heaven  in  which  shine  the  sun  of  charity,  the 
moon  of  continence,  the  stars  of  the  other  virtues. 

Ver.  24. — He  that  Iwcth  Me  not,  &c.  The  reason  then  why  any 
one  does  not  keep  God’s  commandments  is  because  he  loveth  not 
God. 

And  the  word  which  ye  have  heard  is  not  Aline , &c.  Listen  to  S. 
Augustine,  “ He  said  that  the  word  was  not  His,‘  but  the  Father’s, 
intending  Himself  to  be  understood,  who  is  the  Word,  the  Image 
and  the  Son  of  the  Father.  Rightly  does  He  attribute  to  the 
Originator  what  the  equal  does,  from  whom  the  equal  has  that  He 
is  an  equal.” 

Vers.  25,  26. — These  things  have  I spoken  unto  you,  remaining  yet 
with  you.  But  the  Paraclete , the  Holy  Ghost , whom  the  Bather  will 
send , &c.  Thus  should  this  passage  be  pointed  with  the  Roman, 
Greek,  Arabic,  and  Syriac  Versions.  Less  appropriately  S.  Chrysos- 
tom connects  the  words,  remaining  with  you  with  the  Paraclete,  as 
though  it  were  meant,  “ I go  away,  but  the  Holy  Ghost  will  remain 
with  you  in  My  place.”  But  the  words  should  be  referred  to  Christ 
who  went  before.  He  means,  “ These  things  which  thus  far  ye 
have  heard  from  My  mouth  I have  spoken  unto  you,  and  taught 
you,  whilst  I remained  with  you,  but  I know  that,  either  through 
your  own  ignorance,  or  through  the  strangeness  and  sublimity  of 
the  things  which  I have  spoken,  many  are  not  received  or  under- 
stood by  you.  I will  cause  therefore  that  the  Father  will  send  you 
the  Holy  Ghost,  as  a Paraclete,  i.e.  an  Instructor  and  Comforter, 
who  will  bring  back  to  your  memory,  and  explain  to  you  all  these 
things  which  I have  said  unto  you.  By  His  illuminations  ye  will 
easily  understand  all  things.  He  will  comfort  you  when  you  are 
sad  at  My  departure,  and  will  strengthen  you  under  the  persecution 
of  'he  Jews,  or  any  other  tribulation.”  That  the  Holy  Ghost  did 
th.s  is  seen  by  the  earlier  chapters  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  and 
elsewhere.  As  S.  Chrysostom  says,  “ He  frequently  speaks  of  the 
Comforter  because  of  their  sadness.” 

Whom  the  Father  shall  send  in  My  name,  i.e .,  says  S.  Cyril,  through 
Me,  because  the  Holy  Ghost  proceedeth  from  the  Father  and 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


lo6 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIV. 


the  Son.  Wherefore  the  Father  with  the  Son,  or  through  the  Son, 
as  He  breathes,  so  also  He  sends  the  Holy  Ghost  2d.  In  My 
name , i.e.  for  My  sake,  and  because  of  My  merits.  3d.  In  My 
name,  i.e,  for  Me  in  My  place,  that  He  may  finish  My  work  which 
I have  begun,  and  by  the  preaching  of  the  Apostles  may  disseminate 
My  faith,  My  doctrine,  My  Church  throughout  all  nations. 

He  shall  teach  you  all  things , which  pertain  to  my  advent  and 
Incarnation.  All  things  which  are  necessary  for  the  foundation, 
instruction,  establishment  of  the  Church.  Listen  to  Didymus  (lib.  de 
Spir.  Sane.) — M He  shall  teach  the  perfect  in  the  faith  of  Christ 
spiritual  and  intellectual  sacraments.  But  He  shall  teach  by 
infusing  invisibly  the  knowledge  of  Divine  things  into  the  soul.” 
And  Augustine — “ The  Son  speaketh  not  without  the  Holy  Ghost : 
neither  doth  the  Holy  Ghost  teach  without  the  Son,  but  the  Trinity 
speaketh  and  teacheth  all  things.  But  unless  separate  mention  were 
made  of  each  Person,  human  weakness  could  not  receive  these  things.” 
And  shall  suggest  (suggest,  Vulg.)  Greek,  wro/ai^<«/,  i.e.  shall  bring 
back  to  memory.  So  Cyril,  Augustine,  &c.  Wherefore  from  this 
passage  S.  Augustine  takes  notice  that  the  external  voice  of  an  apostle 
or  preacher  does  not  suffice  for  the  understanding  or  reception  of  the 
thing  preached,  but  that  this  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  in- 
wardly enlightens  the  mind  to  understand  those  things,  and  inclines 
the  will  to  embrace  them,  and  strengthens  the  memory  to  retain  them. 
An  orthodox  doctor  teaches  this.  Theophylact  says,  “The  Holy 
Ghost  taught  all  that  Christ  had  not  said  to  them,  as  not  being  able 
to  bear  it.  Also  He  brought  to  mind  what  the  Lord  had  said,  but 
which  they,  through  its  obscurity  or  the  dulness  of  their  understand- 
ing, had  been  unable  to  remember.” 

Ver.  27. — Peace  I leave  you.  My peace,  &c.  The  Arabic  translates 
My  own  peace.  This  is  Christ’s  farewell.  For  the  Hebrews,  when 
they  salute  any  one  coming,  or  bid  good-bye  when  departing,  say, 
Peace  be  with  you.  Where  under  the  word  peace  they  wish  every  kind 
of  good,  prosperity,  and  happiness.  It  is  as  though  Christ  said, 
“ Going  away  from  you,  I give  to  you,  O ye  Apostles  and  your 
successors,  and  as  it  were  leave  you,  My  benediction  for  an  inherit- 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


Christ’s  peace. 


107 


ance.  By  this  I pray  God  to  give  you  every  good  thing.  And  this  I 
do  not  vainly  or  briefly,  like  the  world,  but  truly,  solidly,  eternally. 
I do  it  not  by  adulatory  words,  as  worldly  people  do,  but  really 
supplicating  and  bestowing  grace  and  power,  by  which  ye  may 
securely  attain  to  the  eternal  goods,  and  by  your  preaching,  charity, 
and  prayers  may  lead  many  others  to  the  same  blessed  end.”  So 
Maldonatus. 

Jansen  and  Toletus  explain  a little  differently.  They  say,  This 
peace  is  that  of  which  S.  Paul  speaks  in  the  4th  ch.  of  the  Philip- 
pians,  “The  peace  of  God  which  surpasseth  all  sense  keep  your 
heart  and  understanding  in  Christ  Jesus.”  Now  this  peace  includes 
— 1.  Friendship  with  God.  2.  Tranquillity  of  mind  and  calm  in 
temptations  and  persecutions.  3.  Mutual  concord  amongst  our- 
selves. This  makes  men  strong  in  every  danger,  and  gives  conso- 
lation in  every  trouble.  This  the  Lord  bequeaths  us,  not  riches,  nor 
temporal  possessions.  Far  above  all  the  wealth  of  this  world 
peace  stands  pre-eminent. 

Hear  S.  Augustine.  “We  cannot  arrive  at  the  Lord’s  inherit- 
ance, who  wished  us  to  observe  His  testament  of  peace — we  cannot 
have  concord  with  Christ  if  we  quarrel  with  our  fellow-Christians. 
Peace  is  serenity  of  mind,  simplicity  of  heart,  the  bond  of  love,  the 
concord  of  charity.” 

Symbolically,  S.  Augustine.  “ He  leaves  peace  in  this  world, 
abiding  in  which  peace  we  overcome  the  enemy.  He  will  give 
peace  in  the  world  to  come,  when  we  shall  reign  without  an  enemy. 
He  is  our  peace,  both  when  we  believe  that  He  is,  and  when  we 
shall  see  Him  as  He  is.  We  must  observe  that  when  He  saith  1 will 
give,  He  adds  My  peace , wishing  us  to  understand  that  it  is  such 
peace  as  He  hath  Himself,  in  whom  there  is  no  fighting,  because 
He  hath  no  sin.  But  the  peace  which  He  leaves  us  is  rather  to  be 
called  ours , than  His . It  is  such  peace  as  is  consistent  with  the 
state  in  which  we  still  say,  Forgive  us  our  debts.  There  is  peace 
among  ourselves  forasmuch  as  we  trust  and  love  one  another.  But 
it  is  not  full  peace,  because  we  do  not  see  the  thoughts  of  one 
another’s  hearts.” 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


io8 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIV. 


Ver.  28. — Let  not  your  heart  he  troubled , &c.  Christ  adds  this 
because  He  saw  that  the  Apostles  were  sad  at  His  departure,  and 
faint-hearted  on  account  of  the  hatred  of  the  Jews,  and  the  battles 
which  were  impending,  says  S.  Chrysostom.  Lest  the  wolf  should  attack 
the  sheep  when  the  Shepherd  was  absent,  says  S.  Austin.  There- 
fore He  consoles  them,  and  lifts  them  up,  saying,  “ Be  not  troubled 
nor  fearful  because  of  My  departure,  as  though  ye  were  about  to  be 
sheep  without  a Shepherd.  For  I,  as  I have  said,  go  away  indeed 
to  death,  but  I will  rise  again  on  the  third  day,  and  then  I will  come, 
i.e.  I will  return,  to  you.” 

If  ye  loved  Me , &c.  The  apostles  did  love  Christ,  and  therefore 
they  were  troubled  at  His  going  away.  When  therefore  Christ  says, 
If  ye  loved  Me , He  speaks  after  the  manner  of  men.  It  is  the  way 
of  consoling  friends  when  they  are  sad  at  the  departure  of  a friend. 
If  you  showed  Me,  O ye  Apostles,  what  true  and  sincere  love 
demands,  ye  would  not  grieve  but  rejoice  at  My  departure,  for  My 
going  away  will  be  exceedingly  profitable  to  Me,  yea,  and  to  you 
likewise.  For  I am  going  to  the  Father  who  is  greater  than  I,  i.e. 
I am  going  from  consorting  with  men  to  God,  from  human  misery 
and  contempt  to  Divine  felicity,  exaltation,  and  glory.  I am  going 
to  prepare  a place  for  you,  to  which  in  due  time  I will  bring  you. 
So  Cyril. 

For  My  Father  is  greater  than  I.  This  was  the  great  stronghold 
of  the  Arians,  by  which  they  sought  to  prove  that  the  Son  was  not 
God,  but  the  highest  creature  of  God  ; but  SS.  Athanasius,  Augus- 
tine, Basil,  and  the  rest  of  the  Fathers,  admirably  reply  to  them,  that 
Christ  is  here  speaking  of  Himself  not  as  God,  but  as  man.  For  as 
such  He  was  less,  not  only  than  the  Father,  buX  even  than  the  angels. 
And  that  Christ  is  speaking  thus  is  plain  from  hence,  that  He  gives  the 
reason  why  He  is  going  to  the  Father : because , He  saith,  My  Father 
is  greater  than  /.  Now  Christ  goeth  to  the  Father,  in  that,  as  man, 
He  ascendeth  into  heaven.  For  as  God  He  is  alway  in  heaven 
with  the  Father.  Wherefore  S.  Augustine  saith,  “ He  went,  in  that 
He  was  in  one  place  : He  remained,  in  that  He  was  everywhere.” 
'That  is,  He  went  through  His  Humanity,  He  abode  through  His 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


HOW  THE  FATHER  IS  GREATER. 


109 


Divinity.  Therefore  His  Father  was  greater  than  He  in  respect  to 
His  Humanity,  not  His  Divinity.  The  meaning  then  is,  Ye  must 
rejoice,  O ye  Apostles,  at  My  departure,  because  I go  to  the  Father, 
and  ascend  into  heaven  to  greater  honour  and  dignity,  that  I may 
obtain  from  the  Father,  for  Myself  and  for  you,  the  rewards  of  My 
Passion,  even  a seat  at  the  Father’s  right  hand,  and  the  empire  of 
the  universe,  the  adoration  of  all  the  angels,  and  the  conversion  of 
all  nations  to  My  faith  and  worship  : and  for  you  the  Holy  Ghost 
and  all  His  gifts,  armed  with  which  ye  shall  conquer  the  whole 
world  for  Me  and  for  yourselves,  and  bring  it  with  you  to  celestial 
glory.  For  those  things,  which  are  far  greater  than  what  ye  have 
as  yet  seen  and  received,  I will  ask  and  obtain  when  I go  to  the 
Father. 

Some  fathers,  moreover,  in  order  to  give  a complete  answer  to 
the  Arians,  answer  more  subtilly,  but  intricately,  that  the  Father  is 
greater  than  the  Son  not  only  as  He  is  man,  but  also  as  He  is  God, 
because  the  name  of  Father  seems  among  men  to  be  more  honour- 
able than  the  name  of  Son.  For  a father  is  the  beginning  and 
cause  of  a son.  The  Father  therefore  is  greater  than  the  Son,  not  in 
magnitude,  nor  time,  nor  virtue,  nor  dignity,  nor  adoration,  but  in 
respect  of  a certain  honour  amongst  men,  i.e.  in  respect  of  origin, 
because  the  Father  is  the  origin  of  the  Son.  So  S.  Athanasius 
(Serin,  cont.  Arian),  S.  Hilary  (lib.  9,  de  Trin.\  &c.  Although  with 
reference  to  Divine  things,  filiation,  from  whence  is  derived  the  idea 
of  sonship,  is  something  as  excellent  and  as  honourable  as  is 
the  idea  of  paternity  in  the  Father.  Indeed,  as  the  Son  hath  from 
the  Father  that  He  is  the  Son,  so  in  turn  the  Father  hath  from  the 
Son  that  He  is  the  Father.  For  the  Father  is  He  who  hath  the 
Son.  Wherefore  in  this  case,  that  passive  origin  which  is  in  the  Son 
is  in  itself  as  worthy  and  as  honourable  as  that  active  origin  which 
is  in  the  Father.  For  it  is  as  great  to  be  Begotten  God  as  it  is  to 
beget  God.  Therefore  it  is  as  great  to  be  the  Son  as  to  be  the 
Father.  Lastly,  each  hath  altogether  in  personality  the  same  Divine 
Essence,  the  same  majesty  and  omnipotence.  Wherefore  one 
cannot  be  greater  than  the  other.  “ Greater,”  says  S.  Hilary,  “ is  He 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


no 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIV. 


who  gives  by  the  authority  of  a giver,  but  He  is  not  less  to  whom  it 
is  given  to  be  One  (with  the  Giver).”  Greater,  i.e.  in  the  estimation 
of  men,  not  of  God.  Wherefore  Maldonatus  thinks  that  Hilary  and 
some  others  have  conceded  too  much  to  the  Arians.  And  Damascene 
(lib.  i,  de  Fid.)  corrects  them  thus,  “The  Father  is  greater,  not  in 
nature,  nor  in  dignity,  but  only  in  origin.  (See  Suarez , lib . 2,  de  Trin. 
cap . 4.)  And  in  my  opinion  this  was  the  teaching  of  S.  Hilary. 

Moreover,  the  analogy  of  the  Divine  compared  with  human 
generation  is  so  entirely  different  as  to  refute  the  Arians.  For  in 
things  human  the  father  is  greater  than  his  son.  1st.  Because  he  is 
prior,  and  senior  to  the  son.  2d.  Because  he  is  greater  in  stature 
and  bulk,  for  a grown-up  man  generates  a little  infant  3d.  Because 
he  produces  a nature  numerically  different  from  himself,  which  he 
communicates  to  his  son.  Wherefore  he  is  greater  than  that 
nature  as  being  its  author,  4th.  Because  of  his  own  free  will  he 
begets  a son.  For  it  was  possible  to  him  not  to  have  begotten. 
But  in  things  Divine  the  manner  is  altogether  different.  For  the 
Father  is  greater  than  the  Son  neither  in  age  nor  size : neither  does 
He  beget  a Deity  different  from  His  Own,  but  communicates  to  the 
Son  the  same  Deity  which  He  Himself  has.  Neither  does  He 
beget  of  His  own  will,  so  to  say,  but  of  the  natural  fruitfulness  of  the 
Divine  Nature  He  produces  a Son  the  equal  of  Himself,  nor  can 
He  produce  another.  Lastly,  S.  Cyril,  in  the  Council  of  Ephesus, 
proves  that  the  Father  is  greater  than  Christ  in  so  far  as  Christ  is 
man,  but  not  in  that  He  is  God,  after  this  manner : — “ We  acknow- 
ledge Him  (the  Son)  to  be  in  all  respects  as  the  Father,  to  be 
incapable  either  of  turning,  or  of  change,  and  to  have  need  of 
nothing,  a perfect  Son,  like  unto  the  Father,  and  differing  from  Him 
only  in  this  respect  that  the  Father  is  unbegotten.  For  He  is  the 
perfect  and  express  Image  of  the  Father.  And  it  is  certain  that  the 
Image  ought  fully  to  include  all  those  things  in  which  the  Pattern 
itself,  which  is  greater,  is  perfectly  expressed,  even  as  the  Lord  Him- 
self hath  taught,  saying,  the  Father  is  greater  than  1” 

Ver.  29. — And  now  I have  told  you,  &c.  That  is,  and  now  I fore- 
tell to  you  My  departure  and  death,  My  resurrection  and  return  to 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


SATAN  HATH  NOTHING  IN  CHRIST. 


Ill 


you,  not  that  ye  should  condole  with  Me,  and  look  after  your  own 
safety,  but  that,  when  ye  see  those  things  fulfilled,  ye  may  believe 
that  I foreknew  and  foreordained  them  all,  and  therefore  that  I 
submitted  to  death,  not  of  necessity,  but  of  My  own  free-will,  for 
your  salvation  and  that  of  the  world,  and  therefore  that  ye  may 
believe  that  I am  the  Messiah,  the  Son  of  God,  the  Saviour. 

Ver.  30. — I will  not  henceforth  talk  much  with  you , &c.  For 
this  is  not  the  time  to  speak  much,  but  to  conclude,  for  the  prince 
of  this  world , to  whom  worldly  men  are  subject,  by  sinning  after  their 
own  will,  cometh . That  is,  he  cometh  to  take  and  kill  Me.  For 
Christ  said  this  when  Judas  was  approaching  with  the  officers,  who 
were  sent  by  the  chief  priests  to  take  Him. 

But  he  hath  nothing  in  Me , i.e.  he  cometh  to  take  Me,  but  he 
hath  no  power  over  Me,  because  he  will  find  nothing  of  sin  in  Me, 
nothing  of  that  which  caused  Adam  and  his  posterity  to  die. 
Wherefore  he  must  unjustly  bring  death  upon  Me  being  innocent. 
And  this  I am  ready  to  suffer,  that  by  means  of  My  unjust  death  I 
may  despoil  him  of  his  power,  and  deliver  men  from  his  jurisdiction 
and  tyranny.  So  Cyril  and  Chrysostom.  The  innocence  therefore 
of  Christ,  and  the  death  of  that  innocent  One,  hath  delivered  all  of 
us,  the  guilty  ones,  from  harm.  And  this  was  that  supreme  con- 
solation of  Christ,  which  He  here  brings  home  to  the  Apostles.  Or, 
as  Maldonatus  puts  it,  “ The  devil  cometh,  to  take  and  kill  Me  by 
means  of  the  Jews,  but  in  Me  he  hath  nothing,  i.e.  he  will  hot  be 
able  to  overcome  or  destroy  Me,  as  he  hopes ; for  although  I am 
about  to  die,  I shall  not  do  so  through  his  power  or  strength,  but  of 
My  own  free  choice,  that  I may  fulfil  My  Father’s  will” 

Ver.  31. — But  that  the  world  may  know , &c.  That  is,  “ I will  die, 
not  compelled  by  the  devil’s  servants,  the  Jews,  but  freely,  out  of 
love  and  obedience  to  the  Father.  For  He  hath  given  Me  com- 
mandment to  undergo  death  for  the  redemption  of  men.  Wherefore 
so  I do,  submitting  myself  to  death.”  So  SS.  Chrysostom,  Cyril,  &c. 

You  may  say,  Christ  received  commandment  from  the  Father  to 
suffer,  to  die,  and  to  do  the  things  which  He  did.  Therefore  He 
could  not  will  the  contrary,  neither  was  He  free,  for  had  He  done 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1 1 2 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIV. 


otherwise  He  would  have  sinned.  But  Christ  is  impeccable  by  a 
twofold  title, — ist,  on  account  of  His  hypostatic  union  with  the 
Word;  2d,  on  account  of  the  light  of  glory,  in  that  He  seeth  God. 
For  Christ  and  the  Blessed,  because  they  clearly  perceive  that  God 
is  infinite  Good,  are  so  wholly  ravished  with  His  love  that  they  can- 
not either  love  or  will  anything  which  is  contrary  or  displeasing 
to  Him.  I reply  : the  hypostatic  union  with  the  Word  made  Christ 
impeccable  in  such  manner  that  the  office  of  the  Word  was  to  keep 
and  preserve  that  humanity  which  was  hypostatically  united  to 
Itself  altogether  sinless,  lest  the  Word,  or  God,  which  upheld  the 
humanity,  should  be  said  to  sin.  But  the  Word  kept  the  humanity 
from  sin,  not  by  physically  predetermining,  so  to  say,  the  will  of 
Christ,  to  obey  the  Father’s  commandment,  but  only  by* Its  con- 
gruous grace,  so  continually  preventing  It,  ^nd  sweetly  directing  and 
urging  It,  as  It  foreknew  future  conditional  events,  that  Itself  was 
(ever)  consenting  to  this  grace,  and  therefore  was  always  Trefely  sub- 
jecting Itself  to  the  will  of  God,  and  never,  even  by  venial  offences, 
displeasing  Him.  Moreover,  the  light  of  glory  constrained  indeed 
Christ,  forasmuch  as  He  was  blessed  to  subject  Himself  in  beatific 
act  to  the  will  of  God  and  the  decree  of  death  as  perceived  by  this 
light  to  be  His  will.  Yet  it  did  not  force  Him,  in  so  far  as  He  was 
a wayfarer  tyiator).  For  as  a wayfarer  He  had  infused  knowledge, 
as  we  have  faith,  according  to  which  He  was  able  freely  to  elicit 
acts  of  love  and  obedience,  or  not  to  elicit  them,  at  His  pleasure, 
as  we  of  our  free  will  are  able  to  elicit  similar  acts.  He  therefore 
freely  elicited  that  act  by  which,  in  obedience  to  the  Father’s  com- 
mandment, He  accepted  the  death  of  the  cross,  saying,  “ Lo  ! I come 
to  do  Thy  will,  O God”  (Ps.  xlvii.)  Neither  did  the  prior  act  deter- 
mine ex  necessitate  the  subsequent  act,  because  they  were  altogether 
incommensurable,  and  of  a different  order.  For  the  former  is  the 
act  of  one  of  the  (already)  Blessed,  the  latter  act  an  act  of  one  travel- 
ling to  the  country.  See  the  Schoolmen. 

Arise , &c.  These  words  depend  upon  what  went  before,  and  are 
thus  connected,  “ That  the  world  may  know  that  I love  the  Father, 
and  am  obedient  to  His  commandment  to  suffer  death,  arise,  and 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


Christ's  fa  rewell.  i i $ 

let  us  go  to  the  garden  of  Gethsemane  where  the  Jews  await  Me  to 
take  and  kill  Me.” 

You  will  ask  whether  Christ  actually  rose  from  the  table,  and 
went  out  of  the  house  towards  Gethsemane,  and  in  the  way  pro- 
ceeded to  utter  the  things  which  John  records  in  the  three  following 
chapters  : and  that  then,  when  they  were  ended,  He  passed  over  the 
brook  Cedron,  and  entered  the  garden,  where  he  was  betrayed  by 
Judas,  and  taken  by  the  Jews,  as  John  narrates,  ch.  xviii.  i,  &c. 
Cyril  and  Augustine  answer  in  the  affirmative,  and  this  is  probable. 
Maldonatus  and  others,,  more  probably,  answer  in  the  negative.  They 
think  that  Christ  did  not  go  out  of  the  house.  They  are  of  this 
opinion,  ist,  Because  John  does  not  say  so.  2d,  Because  Christ 
could  not  conveniently,  with  the  apostles  following  Him,  say  all 
things  in  the  way  which  are  related  in  the  three  following  chapters, 
so  that  they  could  hear  and  understand  them.  Christ  saith  there- 
fore, Arise , because  He  did  actually  rise  up  from  the  table,  and 
stood  upon  His  feet,  and  bade  the  apostles  do  the  same,  that  they 
might  go  away  with  Him  to  the  mount  of  Olives.  But,  as  dear 
friends  are  wont  to  do  when  they  are  saying  farewell,  and  are  hardly 
tearing  themselves  away  from  those  they  so  tenderly  love,  so  did 
Christ,  as  they  were  standing,  resume  a fresh  and  longer  discourse, 
prolonging  it  until  the  18th  chapter.  Then  bringing  it  to  a close, 
He  went  across  the  brook  Cedron  to  the  mount  of  Olives.  For 
such  is  the  wont  of  those  who  love  when  they  are  bidding  their 
mutual  good-byes.  As  Ovid  says,  when  he  is  going  away  into 
exile  (lib.  1,  Trist.)  : 

Thrice  did  I turn  my  steps, 

And  thrice  the  threshold  gain  : 

To  linger  near  with  fond  regret 
My  footsteps  were  full  fain. 

Farewell,  farewell,  I cried  : 

Words  full  of  love  I said  : 

Then,  with  a last  fond  kiss, 

For  ever  from  it  fled. 

Tropologically  : when  any  arduous  duty  is  decreed  by  God,  or 

ordained  by  our  superiors,  such  as  a dangerous  journey,  death,  or 

VOL.  v.  H 


fed  by 


114 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XV. 


martyrdom,  let  us  generously  and  with  alacrity  offer  ourselves  to 
God  as  victims  of  charity  and  obedience,  and  freely  meet  the  danger, 
saying  with  Christ,  Arise,  let  us  go  hence . For  he  who  breaks  the 
first  onset  of  fear,  by  boldly  meeting  it,  has  overcome  half  the  diffi- 
culty, and  will  easily  vanquish  the  remainder.  Daily  experience 
proves  that  " He  has  accomplished  the  half  of  a deed  who  has  well 
begun.” 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


( IIS  ) 


CHAPTER  XV. 

I  The  consolation  and  mutual  love  between  Christ  and  His  members , under  the 
parable  of  the  vine.  18  A comfort  in  the  hatred  and  persecution  of  the  world. 
26  The  office  of  the  Holy  Ghost , and  of  the  apostles. 

I AM  the  true  vine,  and  my  Father  is  the  husbandman. 

2  Every  branch  in  me  that  beareth  not  fruit  he  taketh  away  : and  every 
branch  that  beareth  fruit,  he  purgeth  it,  that  it  may  bring  forth  more  fruit. 

3  Now  ye  are  clean  through  the  word  which  I have  spoken  unto  you. 

4  Abide  in  me,  and  I in  you.  As  the  branch  cannot  bear  fruit  of  itself,  except 
it  abide  in  the  vine ; no  more  can  ye,  except  ye  abide  in  me. 

5  I am  the  vine,  ye  are  the  branches  : he  that  abideth  in  me,  and  I in  him, 
the  same  bringeth  forth  much  fruit : for  without  me  ye  can  do  nothing. 

6  If  a man  abide  not  in  me,  he  is  cast  forth  as  a branch,  and  is  withered ; and 
men  gather  them,  and  cast  them  into  the  fire,  and  they  are  burned. 

7  If  ye  abide  in  me,  and  my  words  abide  in  you,  ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will,  and 
it  shall  be  done  unto  you. 

8  Herein  is  my  Father  glorified,  that  ye  bear  much  fruit ; so  shall  ye  be  my 
disciples. 

9  As  the  Father  hath  loved  me,  so  have  I loved  you : continue  ye  in  my  love. 
10  If  ye  keep  my  commandments,  ye  shall  abide  in  my  love  ; even  as  I have 
kept  my  Father’s  commandments,  and  abide  in  his  love. 

11  These  things  have  I spoken  unto  you,  that  my  joy  might  remain  in  you, 
and  that  your  joy  might  be  full. 

12  IT  This  is  my  commandment,  That  ye  love  one  another,  as  I have  loved  you. 
13  Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,  that  a man  lay  down  his  life  for  his 
friends. 

14  Ye  are  my  friends,  if  ye  do  whatsoever  I command  you. 

15  Henceforth  I call  you  not  servants ; for  the  servant  knoweth  not  what  his 
lord  doeth : but  I have  called  you  friends ; for  all  things  that  I have  heard  of  my 
Father  I have  made  known  unto  you. 

16  Ye  have  not  chosen  me,  but  I have  chosen  you,  and  ordained  you,  that  ye 
should  go  and  bring  forth  fruit,  and  that  your  fruit  should  remain ; that  whatsoever 
ye  shall  ask  of  the  Father  in  my  name,  he  may  give  it  you. 

17  These  things  I command  you,  that  ye  love  one  another. 

18  IT  If  the  world  hate  you,  ye  know  that  it  hated  me  before  it  hated  you. 

19  If  ye  were  of  the  world,  the  world  would  love  his  own  : but  because  ye  are 
not  of  the  world,  but  I have  chosen  you  out  of  the  world,  therefore  the  world 
hateth  you. 

20  Remember  the  word  that  I said  unto  you.  The  servant  is  not  greater  than 


Digitized  by  AnOOQle 


II 6 S.  JOHN,  c.  XV. 

his  lord.  If  they  have  persecuted  me,  they  will  also  persecute  you  ; if  they  have 
kept  my  saying,  they  will  keep  yours  also. 

21  But  all  these  things  will  they  do  unto  you  for  my  name's  sake,  because  they 
know  not  him  that  sent  me. 

22  If  I had  not  come  and  spoken  unto  them,  they  had  not  had  sin  ; but  now 
they  have  no  cloke  for  their  sin. 

23  He  that  hateth  me,  hateth  my  Father  also. 

24  If  I had  not  done  among  them  the  works  which  none  other  man  did,  they 
had  not  had  sin  : but  now  have  they  both  seen  and  hated  both  me  and  my  Father. 

25  But  this  corneth  to  pass,  that  the  word  might  be  fulfilled  that  is  written  in 
their  law,  They  hated  me  without  a cause. 

26  But  when  the  Comforter  is  come,  whom  I will  send  unto  you  from  the 
Father,  even  the  Spirit  of  truth,  which  proceedeth  from  the  Father,  he  shall 
testify  of  me : 

27  And  ye  also  shall  bear  witness,  because  ye  have  been  with  me  from  the 
beginning. 

Ver.  1. — I am  the  true  Vine . The  Greek  has  a double  art.  a fiwsXoi 
h dt'.fjfaq,  the  vine  the  true.  The  Syriac  is,  I am  that  vine  of  truth . 
Christ  here  sets  forth  the  parable  of  the  vine  and  the  branches  with 
this  end  and  view,  to  teach  the  Apostles  that  they  must  abide  in 
His  faith  and  love,  and  not  depart  therefrom  in  consequence  of  His 
impending  passion  and  death.  That  this  is  the  great  object  of  the 
parable  is  plain  from  the  ninth  verse  more  especially,  Abide  ye  in  My 
love. 

Christ  here  compares  Himself  to  a vine,  not  as  He  is  God,  as 
Arius  maintained,  trying  to  prove  that  the  Son  is  inferior  to  the 
Father,  as  being  the  Husbandman,  but  as  man.  For  so  men  are 
grafted  into  Him  as  branches.  For  they  are  of  the  same  nature  and 
kind  as  the  Vine.  Wherefore  S.  Hilary  says  (lib.  9,  de  Trin.), 
“ Christ  to  this  end  assumed  flesh,  that  we  fleshly  men  might  as 
branches  be  grafted  into  Him  as  the  Vine.”  But  yet  the  flesh  of 
Christ  would  not  have  had  that  power  of  producing  vine-branches, 
i.e.  faithful  and  holy  people,  unless  the  Godhead  h^d  been  united 
to  it.  Wherefore  Cyril  says  that  Christ  was  the  Vine  by  reason  of 
His  Godhead.  And  S.  Augustine  saith,  “Although  Christ  would 
not  have  been  the  Vine  except  He  had  been  man,  yet  He  would  not 
have  bestowed  His  grace  upon  the  branches  unless  He  had  been 
God.” 

You  will  inquire  why  Christ  compared  Himself  to  a vine  rathei 


Digitized  brGoogle 


WHY  CHRIST  COMPARED  TO  A VINE.  117 

than  to  an  apple,  or  nut,  or  some  other  tree  ? S.  Athanasius  (Disp. 
cont  Ariati.)  and  others  reply,  On  account  of  the  many  qualities 
of  the  vine  in  which  it  excels  other  trees,  and  which  admirably  fit  it 
to  be  a type  of  Christ.  These  are — 1st,  Its  most  abundant  fruit : 
for  it  is  the  most  fruitful  of  all  plants.  To  this  David  refers 
(Ps.  cxxviii.):  “Thy  wife  shall  be  as  the  fruitful  vine.”  2d.  On 

account  of  the  sweetness  of  its  fruit.  3d.  On  account  of  wine, 
which  is  made  from  its  fruit,  and  which  makes  the  heart  glad,  and 
which  produces  many  effects  which  may  be  likened  to  the  fruits  of 
the  coming  of  Christ.  4th.  Because  of  all  plants  in  comparison  with 
the  size  of  its  stem  it  most  widely  diffuses  its  branches.  By  which 
the  extension  of  the  Church  is  signified,  as  it  is  said  in  Ps.  lxxx., 
“ She  spread  out  her  branches  unto  the  sea,  and  her  boughs  unto 
the  river.”  5th.  The  vine  has  sweet-smelling  flowers,  and  very  broad 
leaves,  with  which  it  gives  shade  to  other  plants.  Now  the  leaves 
of  Christ  are  the  external  graces  of  preaching,  conversing,  &c. 

6th.  The  wine  from  old  vines  is  best,  and  the  wine  from  those 
more  recently  planted  is  the  most  abundant  Some  vines  live  for 
more  than  200  years,  and  then  have  the  flavour  of  wild  honey. 

7th.  No  tree  has  more  durable  wood  than  the  vine. 

Lastly,  vines  need  very  assiduous  culture.  It  is  necessary  to  dig, 
to  plant,  to  drain,  manure,  to  prune.  Thus,  too,  does  the  Church, 
or  a holy  soul  which  is  grafted  into  Christ  the  Vine,  require  great 
and  constant  care. 

Moreover,  there  were  two  peculiar  and  chief  reasons  why  Christ 
here  compares  Himself  to  a vine,  rather  than  to  any  other  tree. 
The  first  was  that  Christ  had  just  previously  instituted  the  Eucharist, 
and  under  the  species  of  wine  had  given  the  Apostles  His  Blood  to 
drink,  and  had  left  It  to  be  drank  by  the  faithful  throughout  all 
ages,  that  they  might  glow  with  His  love  as  with  new  wine,  and  over- 
come all  temptations.  Wherefore,  since  shortly  before  He  had 
admonished  the  Apostles  to  persevere  in  His  love,  even  when  they 
saw  Him  betrayed  by  Judas,  and  crucified  and  slain,  so  now  He 
inculcates  the  same  by  the  parable  of  the  vine,  thus : As  the  branch 
always  inheres  in  the  vine,  and  cannot  be  torn  from  it  by  cold  or 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


Il8  S.  JOHN,  c.  XV. 

tempest,  so  that  it  should  not  bear  fruit ; so  likewise  do  ye,  O My 
Apostles,  abide  in  My  love,  neither  do  ye  fall  away  from  believing  in 
and  loving  Me  because  of  My  passion  and  death,  for  so  will  ye  bring 
forth  great  and  abundant  fruit. 

The  other  reason  was  because  Christ  was  now  going  to  His 
passion  and  death  upon  the  cross,  which  the  vine  with  her  grapes 
very  excellently  represents.  For  as  the  choice  wine  is  expressed  from 
the  trodden  grapes,  so  also  from  Christ  trodden  in  the  winepress  of 
the  cross  was  expressed  the  blood  which  redeemed  the  world. 
Christ  here  alludes  to  what  Jacob  foretold  concerning  Him 
(Gen.  xlix.  n),  “Binding  His  colt  to  the  vine,  and  to  the  grape- 
tree,  O my  son,  His  she  ass.  He  shall  wash  His  robe  in  wine,  and 
His  cloke  in  the  blood  of  the  grape.  His  eyes  are  more  beautiful 
than  wine.” 

Hence  St.  Hilary  says,  “ Rising  up  to  the  consummation  of  the 
sacraments  of  the  Passion,  He  sets  forth  the  mysteries  of  corporeal 
assumption,  by  which,  as  though  we  were  branches,  we  dwell  in 
the  Vine.” 

See  St.  Bernard’s  Treatise  on  the  Passion  (if  indeed  it  is  his  work, 
for  the  style  is  different),  on  the  words,  I am  the  true  Vine>  when  he 
says  among  other  things,  “The  vine  is  wont  to  be  propagated  by 
slips,  not  sown ; so  Christ  is  the  Vine  begotten  of  the  Vine,  i.e.  He 
is  God  begotten  of  God,  the  Son  of  the  Father.  But  that  He  should 
bring  forth  more  fruit,  He  was  planted  in  the  earth,  i.e.  was  born 
of  the  Virgin  Mary.”  Thus  he  adapts  all  the  circumstances  of  the 
vine  to  Christ.  “How,”  he  says,  “was  the  glory  of  Christ  cut  off? 
with  the  knife  of  ignominy.  His  power?  with  the  knife  of  humilia- 
tion. His  pleasure  ? with  the  knife  of  pain.  His  riches  ? with  the 
knife  of  poverty.”  In  the  4th  chapter  he  treats  of  the  bonds  of  the 
vine,  and  applies  them  to  the  cords  with  which  Christ  was  bound 
when  He  was  taken,  and  when  He  was  bound  to  the  pillar  and 
beaten  : also  to  the  crown  of  thorns  with  which  the  Jews  bound  His 
head,  also  to  the  iron  nails  with  which  He  was  bound  to  the  cross. 
In  the  5th  chapter  he  treats  of  the  culture  of  the  vine ; in  the  6th 
of  the  leaves  of  the  vine,  which  are  very  broad,  and  which  he  explains 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  ELECT  VINE. 


119 

of  the  words  of  Christ,  especially  His  seven  last  words  which  He 
uttered  on  the  Cross.  For  they  as  it  were  by  their  shadow  protect 
and  comfort  us  in  every  time  of  temptation. 

You  will  ask  further,  why  Christ  is  called  the  true  Vine? 
Euthymius  answers,  Because  He  brings  forth  the  fruit  of  truth.  The 
same  Euthymius  says,  Because  He  is  the  excellent,  incorruptible,  and 
spiritual  Vine. 

I would  say  that  Christ  is  called  the  true  Vine , because  He  truly 
has  the  nature,  properties,  and  qualities  of  the  vine.  For  as  a true 
vine  produces  true  branches  and  true  grapes,  so  does  Christ  bring 
forth  true  believers  and  true  virtues  by  His  grace,  which  He  instills 
into  them  by  His  wine-bearing  sap.  Thus  then  He  is  called  the  true 
Vine  not  corporeally,  but  spiritually.  The  true  Vine  therefore  is 
opposed  to  the  false  and  deceitful  vine — that  which  has  the  appear- 
ance but  not  the  nature  of  a vine,  which  produces  not  grapes  but 
wild  grapes.  Such  are  the  vines  of  Sodom,  which  produce  grapes 
fair  in  outward  sight,  but  when  you  touch  them,  they  crumble  into 
dust  and  ashes,  as  Josephus  testifies  {lib.  2,  de  Bell  c.  5).  Such 
like  vines  were  the  Jews,  revolting  from  God  to  idols  and  sin. 
These  are  spoken  of  Deut.  xxxii.  31,  “ Of  the  vine  of  Sodom  is  their 
vine,  and  of  the  suburbs  of  Gomorrah : their  grapes  are  grapes  of 
gall,  and  of  a most  bitter  cluster  : their  wine  is  the  gall  of  dragons, 
and  the  deadly  vemon  of  asps.” 

2d.  Christ  is  the  true,  special,  and  perfect  Vine,  compared 
with  whom  all  others  are  not  true  vines,  but  only  shadows.  So 
Christ  is  called  true  Light,  true  Life,  true  Bread,  because  He  shines, 
quickens,  nourishes,  more  really  than  any  corporeal  light,  life,  or 
bread.  Christ  therefore  is  the  elect  Vine , Heb.  Sorec,  i.e.,  the 
singular  and  chiefest  Vine,  of  which  Isaias  speaks  chap.  v.  This 
hath  propagated  its  branches  of  faith  and  the  Church  throughout 
the  whole  world,  and  every  where  produces  grapes,  i.e.  troops  of 
Martyrs,  Virgins,  Confessors,  and  all  Saints,  according  as  it  is  said 
{Zach.  ix.  17),  “For  what  is  His  goodness,  and  what  is  His  beauty, 
unless  the  com  of  the  elect,  and  the  wine  that  bringeth  forth 
virgins?”  {Vulg.) 


Digitized  by 


120 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XV. 


And  My  Father  is  the  Husbandman , i.e.  the  Vindresser.  For  it 
is  He  who  has  planted  Me  as  it  were  a Vine  in  the  earth,  and  who 
prunes  My  branches,  i.e.  the  Apostles  and  the  rest  of  the  faithful, 
cutting  off  the  worthless,  purging  the  fruitful  that  they  may  bring 
forth  more  fruit.  Listen  to  S.  Augustine  (de  Verb.  Horn,  secund. 
Joan.  Serm.  59),  “We  honour  God  by  worship,  not  by  ploughing: 
and  God  honours  us  by  making  us  better.  For  He  by  His  words 
extirpates  the  evil  seeds  from  our  hearts.  He  opens  our  hearts  as 
it  were  by  the  plough  of  His  word,  He  sows  the  seed  of  His 
precepts,  He  expects  the  fruit  of  godliness.” 

The  Arians  made  the  following  objection  : The  vine  and  the 
husbandman  have  a different  nature.  Since  therefore  God  the  Father 
is  a Husbandman  and  Christ  a Vine,  Christ  cannot  be  God.  Atha- 
nasius, Basil,  and  Ambrose  answer  them  by  saying  that  Christ  is  the 
Vine  according  to  the  human  nature  which  He  assumed,  and  so  far 
is  of  a different  nature  from  the  Husbandman,  i.e.  God  the  Father. 
Again,  although  we  grant  Christ  to  be  the  Vine  according  to  the 
Godhead,  even  so  they  gain  nothing.  For  in  the  comparison  of 
things  that  are  like,  not  identity  or  similarity  of  nature  is  to  be  looked 
for,  but  that  in  which  the  likeness  consists.  For  similitudes  are  com- 
monly of  a diverse  and  dissimilar  nature,  but  they  are  compared  in 
some  quality  in  which  they  agree.  There  is  a similitude  between 
a vine  and  a husbandman,  not  in  respect  of  their  nature,  but  in 
respect  of  the  branches  and  the  fruit,  that  is  to  say,  the  grapes 
which  they  bring  forth. 

Ver.  2. — Every  branch  : Christ  says  nothing  about  the  Vine  itself, 
but  only  speaks  of  the  branches,  because  Christ  the  Vine  is  self- 
sufficing.  But  the  disciples  have  need  of  much  help  and  culture 
from  God.  So  Chrysostom. 

Every  branch  in  Me , &c.,  i.e.  every  Christian  who  by  faith  and 
baptism  has  been  as  it  were  a vine-branch  grafted  into  Me,  if  he 
bear  not  the  fruit  of  good  works,  God  the  Father  will  take  him  away, 
i.e.  will  cut  off  from  the  Vine  the  unfruitful  and  worthless  branch. 
This  He  does  both  by  secretly  severing  him  from  the  communication 
of  the  Spirit  and  grace  of  Christ,  and  also  by  publicly  separating 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  PRUNING-HOOK. 


121 


him  from  Christ  by  means  of  excommunication,  or  by  permitting  him 
to  fall  into  heresy.  And  thus  in  death  He  separates  him  from  the 
company  of  Christ  and  His  saints.  But  He  will  purge  him  who 
is  bearing  fruit  from  too  great  luxuriance  of  leaves,  from  insects, 
and  from  every  evil  thing,  i.e.  from  the  love  of  the  vanity  and  the 
filth  of  this  world,  that  he  may  bring  forth  more  fruit.  Christ  is 
speaking  primarily  of  the  apostles,  then  of  all  the  faithful.  For  so 
God  the  Father  had  just  before  separated  Judas  the  traitor  from 
Christ  and  the  other  apostles,  compelling  him  to  depart  out  of  their 
house  and  family.  But  He  purged  Peter  and  the  other  apostles 
from  too  great  love  of  this  life,  and  from  the  fear  of  the  Jews, 
through  which,  when  Christ  was  taken,  they  either  denied  Him,  or 
fled.  He  did  this  when  He  sent  down  upon  them  the  Holy  Ghost 
at  Pentecost.  He  cut  off  that  sinful  love  and  fear,  and  so  filled 
them  with  the  love  of  God  that  they  did  not  fear  the  threats  of 
the  Jews. 

Now  the  pruning-hook  or  knife  by  which  God  purges  the  vine- 
branches,  i.e.  the  faithful,  is,  ist.  The  word  of  God,  whence  He 
adds,  ver.  3,  Ye  are  clean  through  the  word \ &c.  For  the  word  of 
God  teaches  us,  and  stirs  us  up  to  cleanse  our  minds  from  filth. 
2d.  The  pruning-hook  is  tribulation,  affliction,  persecution,  poverty, 
hunger,  and  such  like.  For  those  things  call  us  away  from  the  love 
of  the  world,  and  constrain  us  to  flee  to  the  love  of  God.  Listen 
to  S.  Gregory  (lib.  7,  epist.  32) : “The  fruitful  branch  is  said  to  be 
purged,  because  it  is  pruned  by  discipline  that  it  may  be  led  to 
richer  grace.” 

3d.  Pruning-hooks  are  illuminations,  terrors,  rebukes,  which  God 
sends  into  the  minds  of  the  faithful,  to  purge  out  of  them  the 
hindrances  of  their  faults.  Thus  was  S.  Jerome  rebuked,  yea 
scourged  by  God,  because  he  applied  himself  more  closely  to  the 
study  of  Cicero  than  to  the  Holy  Scriptures.  Hear  what  he  says  in 
his  22nd.  Epist  to  Eustochium : “I  was  hurried  in  spirit  before 
the  tribunal  of  the  Judge,  where  there  was  such  excess  of  light,  and 
the  lightnings  so  shot  from  those  that  stood  around,  that  I fell  to 
the  ground,  and  durst  not  look  upward.  Being  asked  concerning 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


122 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XV. 


my  profession,  I replied  that  I was  a Christian.  Then  spake  the 
Judge,  and  said,  Thou  liest : thou  art  a Ciceronian,  not  a Christian. 
For  where  thy  treasure  is,  there  also  is  thine  heart.  Immediately 
I became  dumb,  and  amidst  the  blows,  for  he  commanded  me  to 
be  beaten,  I was  yet  more  tormented  with  the  fire  of  my  own 
conscience,  remembering  the  verse,  Who  will  confess  to  Thee  in 
hell  ? Thus  I began  to  cry  and  to  howl,  saying,  Have  mercy  upon 
me,  O Lord,  have  mercy  upon  me.  I declare  to  you  that  my 
shoulders  were  livid,  and  that  I felt  the  blows  after  I awoke.  And 
from  that  time  forward  I was  more  zealous  in  reading  the  Divine 
writings  than  I had  been  before  in  reading  those  of  mortal  men.” 

From  what  Christ  here  says,  the  necessity  together  with  the  power 
and  the  integrity  of  good  works,  and  that  faith  alone  does  not 
suffice  for  salvation,  as  the  heretics  say,  is  plainly  manifest  For 
Christ  here  requires  the  fruit,  and  unless  He  find  it,  He  threatens 
every  vine  branch,  i.e.  every  professing  Christian,  with  cutting  off 
from  the  Vine,  and  everlasting  damnation.  Wherefore  they  were 
in  error  who  said  that  perfect  men  were  not  under  obligation  to  do 
good  works.  For  Christ’s  words  in  Me  are  strong  against  them. 
As  though  He  said,  It  is  a disgraceful  thing  that  any  one  believing 
in  Me  should  not  bring  forth  the  fruit  of  charity  and  other  virtues, 
but  should  be  lazy  and  slothful. 

2d.  It  is  plain  that  Luther  is  in  error  when  he  says  that  all  the 
works  of  the  faithful  are  sin,  because  they  emanate  from  innate 
concupiscence,  and  are  not  done  in  perfect  charity.  For  if  this 
were  true,  Christ  would  not  require  them,  nor  call  them  fruit \ but 
rather  condemn  them  as  poison.  ( See  Council  of  Trent , sess.  6, 
can.  25). 

3d.  It  is  plain  that  Luther  equally  errs  when  he  says  that  faith 
is  lost  by  every  mortal  sin.  This,  too,  the  Council  of  Trent  con- 
demns. For  Christ  here  speaks  of  a believer  who  abides  in  Him 
by  faith,  and  yet  has  not  the  fruit  of  charity.  Such  a one  therefore 
hath  faith,  but  not  charity. 

Ver.  3. — Now  ye  are  clean  through  the  word , &c.  This  is  the  prun- 
ing-hook  with  which  God  the  Father  xaOalgsi,  i.e.  purges  and  cleanses 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


CHRIST  PRUNED  HIS  APOSTLES. 


123 


His  apostles,  that  they  may  be  *a0a^/,  i.e.  pure  and  clean , as  the 
word  of  Christ.  For  as  S.  Paul  says  (Heb.  iv.),  “The  Word  of  God 
is  living  and  powerful,  and  more  penetrating  than  any  two-edged 
sword,  and  reaching  even  to  the  dividing  of  soul  and  spirit,  and  of 
the  joints  and  marrow.”  The  meaning  then  is,  My  word,  i.e.  My 
doctrine  which  I have  taught  you,  that  ye  may  obey  and  believe  it, 
is  that  pruning-hook  which  has  purged  you  from  error  and  sins, 
and  has  made  you  clean,  holy,  and  pleasing  to  God. 

Christ  is  speaking  especially  of  His  speech  after  the  Last  Supper, 
which  had  immediately  preceded.  For,  as  Toletus  rightly  perceived, 
this  discourse  inflamed  the  hearts  of  the  disciples,  who  were  already 
bearing  fruit  in  Christ,  and  purged  them  by  grace  and  love  that  they 
should  bring  forth  more  fruit 

For  by  this  discourse  of  Christ  the  Apostles  were  purged  from 
a certain  ignorance . For  Peter  knew  not  whither  Jesus  was  going. 
Thomas  knew  not  the  way.  Judas  asked  to  see  the  Father.  The 
Lord  pruned  away  this  ignorance.  They  were  also  purged  from 
vain  confidence . For  to  Peter,  their  chief,  it  was  said,  Thou  shalt 
deny  Me  thrice.  They  were  purified  from  a sort  of  carnal  affection . 
For  they  were  too  much  addicted  to  reliance  upon  the  sensible 
presence  of  Christ,  desiring  always  to  possess  it  But  now  they 
hear  that  the  Lord  is  going  away  to  the  Father,  and  that  they  must 
remain.  They  were  purged  from  faint-heartedness , which  made 
them  almost  despair  of  their  own  salvation  when  Christ  should  have 
departed.  There  were  many  other  imperfections  which  the  Lord 
pruned  from  His  disciples  on  this  night  of  the  supper. 

Ver.  4. — Abide  in  Me>  as  branches  in  the  Vine,  not  dry  and  fruit- 
less by  faith  only,  but  as  bearing  fruit  and  living  by  love  with  zeal 
for  good  works.  And  I in  you.  This  clause  is  partly  a promise  of 
Christ,  meaning,  “If  ye  abide  in  Me  by  faith  formed  by  love,  I 
promise  you  that  I will  for  My  part  abide  in  you,  as  the  Vine 
remains  in  the  vine-branches  by  a constant  influx  so  as  to  afford 
them  vital  sap  and  nourishment  for  the  production  of  grapes.  In 
like  manner  I will  supply  you  with  the  Spirit  of  grace  to  produce 
good  works  of  charity  and  all  virtues.”  So  S.  Augustine,  Bede, 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


124  s.  JOHN,  C.  XV. 

and  Euthymius.  The  clause  is  partly  also  a precept,  meaning, 
“ Take  heed  that  ye  abide  in  Me,  and  I then  will  abide  in  you,  for 
without  Me  ye  can  do  nothing.  And  this  ye  will  take  care  to  do 
if  ye  abide  in  My  love.  For  so  ye  will  bring  about  that  I in  like 
manner  shall  abide  in  you  by  My  grace.  And  I will  cause  My 
Spirit  continually  to  flow  into  you,  by  which  ye  shall  grow  and 
increase  in  spiritual  life,  and  make  advancement  in  spiritual  works.” 
So  Toletus  and  others.  Hear  S.  Gregory,  in  his  exposition  of  the 
6th  penitential  Psalm,  on  those  words,  “ My  soul  hath  waited  on 
His  words  : ” “ Where  must  we  abide  except  in  Christ  ? Houses 
will  fail,  palaces  crumble  into  ruin,  cities  be  destroyed  to  their 
foundations,  castles  fall,  heaven  and  earth  pass  away,  but  the 
Word  of  the  Lord  remaineth  for  ever : let  us  then  abide  in  Him 
who  abideth  eternally.” 

This  is  Christ’s  summing  up  by  which  He  exhorts  His  disciples  to 
abide  in  Him,  and  persevere  in  His  love  and  doctrine.  This  He 
proceeds  to  maintain  by  giving  seven  reasons.  Here  is  the  first : — 

As  the  branch  cannot  bear  fruit , &c.  That  is,  as  a vine-branch 
draws  life  and  sap  from  the  vine  for  producing  grapes,  so  also  do  ye 
draw  life  and  the  spirit  of  grace  from  Me  to  bring  forth  good  works 
which  may  deserve  eternal  life.  From  this  passage  then  it  is  plain 
that  a man  cannot  of  himself,  nor  by  his  own  natural  powers,  not 
even  externally  from  human  teaching,  or  personally,  draw  the  power 
of  bringing  forth  good  works.  It  must  flow  from  the  inward  grace 
of  Christ.  This  applies  especially  to  good  works  beyond  the  power 
of  nature,  and  the  effect  which  such  works  have  of  meriting  increase 
of  grace  and  glory.  For  the  vine-branch  hath  nothing  of  itself,  but 
draws  all  its  sap,  efficiency,  and  power  of  producing  grapes  from  the 
vine.  Thus  the  Council  of  Trent  defines,  and  explains  this  passage 
(sess.  6,  cap . 16),  and  adds  the  reason  : “ For  since  Christ  Jesus  is 
Himself  the  Head  to  the  members,  and  as  the  Vine  to  the  branches, 
He  causes  virtue  continually  to  flow  into  them  that  are  justified, 
which  virtue  always  precedes  their  good  works,  accompanies  and 
follows  them,  and  without  it  they  are  not  able  in  any  manner  to  be 
pleasing  to  God,  and  meritorious.  It  must  be  believed  that  nothing 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


CO-OPERATING  WITH  GRACE. 


12$ 


more  is  wanting  to  those  who  are  justified  whereby,  in  those  works 
which  are  done  in  God,  they  may  fully  satisfy  the  Divine  law 
according  to  their  condition  in  this  life ; and  they  should  be  truly 
believed  to  have  merited  to  attain  eternal  life  in  its  own  time,  if 
indeed  they  have  departed  in  a state  of  grace.” 

Calvin  objects  : man  has  not  free  will,  nor  does  he  by  it  co-operate 
with  grace,  but  grace  alone  does  the  whole  work.  For  as  the  vine- 
branch  draws  all  the  juice  of  its  grapes  from  the  vine,  and  has  no 
juice  of  itself,  so  does  a man  derive  all  his  power  of  doing  good  works 
from  grace.  And  by  consequence,  he  hath  nothing  of  himself  where- 
with to  co-operate  with  grace,  or  which  he  can  communicate  to  the 
work  which  is  done  by  grace.  I reply,  ist  By  denying  the  conse- 
quence. For  indeed  in  similitudes  all  things  are  not  similar,  so  that 
they  might  or  can  all  be  applied  to  the  thing  compared,  but  the 
similarity  must  be  reserved  for  what  is  intended  to  be  the  likeness. 
Christ  therefore  in  this  place  makes  His  simile  to  consist  only  in 
this,  that  as  the  vine-branch  derives  all  its  vigour  and  sap  for  pro- 
ducing grapes  from  the  vine,  so  likewise  must  a believer  draw  from 
the  grace  of  Christ  all  the  nutriment  and  power  needful  for  producing 
supernatural  works.  But  there  is  this  distinction  to  be  drawn,  that 
a man,  inasmuch  as  he  is  a rational  being,  co-operates  with  grace, 
and  that  freely.  This  the  branch  in  the  vine  does  not  do,  because 
it  is  but  a piece  of  wood  devoid  of  reason.  Now  it  is  the  result 
of  man's  free  co-operation  that  a good  work  is  a free  and  human 
work,  even  as  it  is  because  of  the  influx  of  grace  that  such  a 
work  becomes  supernatural,  worthy  of  God,  and  pleasing  to 
Him* 

2d.  I deny  the  antecedent : for  that  a vine-branch,  in  addition  to 
the  vigour  and  the  sap  which  it  derives  from  the  vine,  does  of  its 
own  nature  contribute  something  to  the  production  of  grapes  is  plain 
from  this,  that  if  some  other  non-fruitbearing  branch,  or  one  bearing 
a different  kind  of  fruit,  as  apples  or  cherries,  were  grafted  into  the 

* I cannot  help  appending  a word  of  admiration  for  the  clear,  beautiful,  lucid 
manner  in  which  k Lapide  shows  how  man’s  free  will  co-operates  with  grace  in 
the  performance  of  good  works.  (Trans.) 


1 26 


S.  JOHN,  c.  XV. 


vine,  it  would  either  produce  nothing,  or  else  would  produce  apples 
or  cherries;  not  grapes.  That  it  produces  grapes,  therefore,  comes 
from  its  being  a vine-branch. 

I confess,  however,  that  the  co-operation  itself  of  free-will  is  also 
of  grace  in  this  sense,  that  unless  free-will  were  prevented,  lifted  up, 
strengthened  and  stirred  up  to  co-operation  by  grace,  and  unless  it 
had  auxiliary  and  co-operating  grace,  it  could  not  co-operate,  or  do 
anything.  This  is  the  same  reason  by  which  Christ  stimulates  His 
Apostles  to  abide  in  Him. 

Ver.  5. — I am  the  Vine , &c. — That  is,  him  who  abides  in  Me  by 
faith  formed  by  love  I likewise  will  love,  and  imbue  with  My  spirit. 
This  man  hears  much  fruity  i.e.  of  good  works,  by  which  he  continu- 
ally merits  an  increase  of  grace  and  glory.  Hence  the  Councils  of 
Milevis  and  Orange  condemn  the  Pelagians  for  saying  that  we  have 
from  God  to  be  men,  but  from  ourselves  to  be  just.  Such,  S.  Augus- 
tine (Tract.  21)  says,  are  not  the  upholders  but  the  destroyers  of 
free-will.  He  thus  sums  up  against  them,  “ He  who  thinks  that 
he  bears  fruit  of  himself  is  not  in  the  Vine : he  who  is  not  in  the 
Vine  is  not  in  Christ : he  who  is  not  in  Christ  is  not  a Christian.” 

For  without  Me  (not  only  by  general  and  natural,  but  by  special 
and  supernatural  prevenient  and  co-operating  grace)  ye  can  do  nothing ; 
i.e.  in  the  way  of  fruit,  which  is  the  fruit  of  the  Vine,  i.e.  of  Christ, 
or  grace  going  before.  That  is,  Ye  can  do  nothing  worthy  of  eternal 
life,  or  grace,  or  merits,  as  the  Pelagians  held,  who  supposed  that 
good  and  meritorious  works  could  be  done  absolutely  by  free-will, 
though  more  easily  by  grace.  But  Christ  did  not  say,  without  Me 
ye  will  have  more  difficulty  in  doing  good,  but,  ye  can  do  nothing. 
Listen  to  the  Council  of  Orange  (cap.  7),  “ Whosoever  shall  say 
that  we  can  think  or  choose  any  good  thing  pertaining  to  everlasting 
salvation  by  the  force  of  nature,  or  can  believe  the  preached  Gospel 
without  the  illumination  and  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  is 
deceived  by  the  spirit  of  heresy,  not  understanding  the  voice  of 
God,  speaking  in  the  Gospel,  Without  Me  ye  can  do  nothing  ” And 
how  this  should  be  understood  the  Council  seems  to  explain,  saying 
(ch.  9),  “ It  is  of  the  Divine  gift  both  that  we  have  right  thoughts, 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


ABIDING  IN  THE  VINE. 


i?7 


and  that  we  keep  our  feet  from  falsehood  and  unrighteousness.  For 
as  often  as  we  do  good,  God  is  in  us,  and  with  us,  since  He  works 
that  we  may  work.” 

Moreover,  Galvin  foolishly  thinks  that  by  the  expression  nothing 
the  co-operation  of  free-will  is  taken  away.  Rather  it  establishes 
free-will  For  if  we  can  do  no  good  supernatural  work  without 
Christ  and  His  grace,  it  follows  that  with  His  grace  we  can  do  good 
works.  As  the  Apostle  says,  “I  have  laboured  more  abundantly 
than  they  all,  yet  not  I (not  by  my  own  power),  but  the  grace  of 
God  which  was  with  me.” 

Lastly,  some  Catholics  falsely  infer  from  those  words  of  Christ, 
without  Me , &c.,  that  all  the  works  of  unbelievers  who  have  not 
the  faith  and  grace  of  Christ  are  sins.  For  the  expression  nothing 
refers  to  works  of  Christ's  grace,  not  to  works  of  nature. 
Therefore  unbelievers  are  able  to  do  such  natural  works  as  honour 
parents,  feed  the  hungry,  do  good  to  their  neighbours,  but  not 
such  as  pertain  to  the  grace  of  Christ,  or  those  which  are  fruitful 
for  meriting  eternal  life.  For  between  grace  and  sin  stands 
nature,  or  a natural  good  deed,  which  is  not  sin,  nor  yet  a work  of 
grace. 

Ye  are  the  branches . Cyril  observes  that  we  are  joined  to,  and 
inhere  in  Christ  as  branches  in  the  vine,  as  well  spiritually,  by  faith, 
hope,  and  charity,  as  corporeally,  in  that  the  vine  is  Christ's  Humanity, 
of  which  we  are  branches  on  account  of  the  identity  of  the  human 
nature,  especially  in  the  Eucharist,  in  which  we  are  joined  and  com- 
mingled with  Christ,  not  only  as  branches  to  the  vine,  but  also  as 
melted  wax  commingled  with  other  melted  wax.  Wherefore  as 
Christ  spoke  of  the  Eucharist  (ch.  vl),  saying,  “Except  ye  eat  the 
Flesh  of  the  Son  of  man,  ye  shall  not  have  life  in  you,”  so  here  He 
speaks  concerning  the  vine  and  its  branches,  If  any  one  abide  not 
in  Me,  he  shall  be  cast  out  as  a branch , and  be  withered,  &c.  And 
Jeremiah  says  (ch.  ii.),  “I  planted  thee  an  elect  vine,  a wholly  true 
seed,  how  then  art  thou  turned  for  me  into  a perverse,  strange  vine?” 
Christ  therefore  is  called  “ the  true  (Hebrew  neeman)  Vine,”  i.e.  the 
faithful,  sincere  Vine,  because  He  never  forsakes  His  branches,  nor 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


128 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XV. 


leaves  them  without  His  inflowing,  but  continually  instils  into  them 
the  sap  of  wine,  that  they  may  produce  true  grapes,  and  the  wine  of 
charity,  grace,  and  glory. 

6.  If  any  one  abide  not  in  Me , &c. — That  is,  just  as  the  unprofit- 
able branch  is  cut  off  from  the  vine,  and  cast  outside  the  vineyard, 
where  it  altogether  dries  up,  and  is  gathered  into  bundles,  and  cast 
into  the  fire,  and  straightway  burned,  so  in  like  manner  the  Christian 
who  does  not  abide  in  Me  by  faith  and  charity,  shall,  after  death,  be 
cast  out  of  doors,  i.e.  be  separated  from  the  Church  of  the  faithful, 
who  are  the  members  of  Christ  And  then  he  shall  wholly  be 
withered,  i.e.  shall  be  deprived  of  all  the  good  sap  of  grace,  and 
shall  be  gathered  by  the  devils  with  the  rest  of  the  reprobate,  that 
he  may  be  cast  into  the  fire  of  hell,  there  to  burn  everlastingly. 
Now  every  word  expresses  a punishment.  They  must  therefore  be 
considered  separately. 

The  first  punishment  is,  he  shall  be  cast  out  of  doors , i.e.  from 
Christ,  from  God,  and  heaven,  from  the  company  of  the  angels  and 
the  saints. 

The  second,  he  shall  wither.  For  in  this  life  sinners  often  retain 
faith  and  hope,  often  feel  the  illumination  of  grace  and  Divine 
impulses  to  repentance,  are  often  warned  by  preachers  and  others 
to  amend  their  lives ; and  they  often  do  works  morally  good.  For 
they  remain  in  Christ  as  the  Vine,  and  do  drink  from  Him  some  of 
the  sap  of  goodness.  But  after  this  life,  being  cut  off  from  Christ, 
they  cannot  derive  any  sap  of  grace,  but  all  God’s  gifts  will  be  taken 
away  from  them  (Luke  xix.  26),  so  that  they  are  fit  for  nothing  but 
to  become  the  fuel  of  hell. 

The  third  is,  they  shall  gather  them.  By  this  it  is  meant  that  the 
reprobate  are  to  be  gathered  together  into  bundles,  that  they  may 
be  thrown  into  the  fire,  from  which  they  will  never  be  able  to 
deliver  themselves,  according  to  the  parable  (Matt.  xiii.  41)  At  the 
same  time  it  is  signified  that  their  reason  will  be  bound,  and  their 
freedom  of  will  taken  away,  so  that  henceforth  they  will  not  be  able 
either  to  will  or  to  do  any  good  thing. 

Fourthly,  they  shall  cast  them  into  the  fire , namely  into  hell,  burning 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  SPlklT  OF  PRAYER. 


129 

with  fire  and  brimstone,  where  the  smoke  of  their  torment  goeth  up 
for  ever  and  ever. 

Fifthly,  sfiatt bum , i. e.  shall  immediately  begin  to  burg  everlastingly. 
This  ends  the  third  reason  of  Christ  by  which  He  exhorts  His  disciples 
to  abide  in  Him.  The  fourth  derived  from  the  reward  comes  next. 

Ver.  7. — If  ye  shall  abide  in  Me,  i.e.  if  ye  shall  persevere  in  My 
love  and  grace,  and  My  words  in  you,  in  your  memory,  that  you 
constantly  call  them  to  mind,  and  in  your  will,  that  you  love  them, 
and  in  works,  that  ye  always  fulfil  My  commandments,  Ye  shall  ask 
what  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done  for  you;  because  ye  will  ask 
nothing  except  according  to  My  will.  In  truth  ye  will  ask  nothing 
except  what  ye  know  is  pleasing  to  God,  and  will  be  for  the 
advancement  of  His  glory  and  your  own  and  your  neighbours’ 
salvation.  For  abiding  in  Jesus,  i.e.  the  Saviour,  they  can  only  wish 
for  what  pertains'to  salvation,  as  S.  Augustine  says.  For  the  branch 
which  exists  in  the  vine,  if  it  could  ask  for  anything,  would  ask  for 
nothing  else  but  to  be  kept  in  the  vine,  and  by  the  influx  from  it  to 
produce  grapes.  Thus  the  righteous  ask  to  be  kept  in  the  grace  of 
Christ,  and  to  do  good  works,  and  this  they  obtain.  For  if  they 
should  ask  anything  carnal,  vicious,  disgraceful,  injurious,  or 
unprofitable,  they  would  ask  what  would  be  displeasing  to  Christ, 
and  forbidden  by  Him.  Therefore  they  would  offend  Him,  and  so 
could  not  abide  in  Him,  nor  obtain  what  they  asked.  Wherefore 
S.  Augustine  says,  Christ’s  words  in  this  place  have  to  do  with  the 
prayer  which  He  taught  us  (Matt  vi.  9).  Let  us  not  depart  from  its 
spirit  In  our  prayers,  and  whatsoever  we  ask  shall  be  done  unto  us. 

Ver.  8. — In  this  is  My  Father  glorified,  &c. — That  is,  is  about  shortly 
to  be  glorified  after  My  death  and  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
This  is  the  fifth  reason  by  which  Christ  urges  His  disciples  to  abide 
in  Him  and  His  love,  because,  that  is,  it  will  conduce  to  the  great 
glory  of  God.  “ Abide  in  Me  and  My  love,  because  by  so  doing 
God  the  Father  will  be  glorified,  that  ye  may  bear  much  fruit,”  that 
being  used  in  the  sense  of  if  Abiding  in  Me,  ye  will  bring  forth  much 
fruit,  even  a mighty  harvest  of  souls,  and  the  conversion  of  the  whole 

world.  And  that  so  ye  may  be  made  My  disciples,  namely,  perfect  and 

VOL.  v.  1 


Digitized  by 


Google 


i3o 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XV. 


exemplary  disciples.  For  they  were  already  Christ’s  disciples,  but 
novices,  and  imperfect.  He  means,  Ye  shall  glorify  God  the 
Father  if  ye  abide  in  Me,  and  preach  My  faith  to  the  whole  world. 
For  by  this  means  ye  shall  take  away  the  idolatry  of  all  nations,  and 
bring  in  everywhere  the  worship  of  one  God  in  true  holiness.  And 
this  will  be  the  greatest  ignominy  to  Satan,  and  the  greatest  glory  to 
God.  For  the  conversion  of  the  nations  will  not  be  your  work,  but 
God?s,  who  will  bring  it  about  by  His  grace.  “ For  by  whom  shall 
we  bring  forth  fruit,  except  by  Him  whose  mercy  preventeth  us  ? ” 
saith  S.  Augustine. 

Again,  that  ye  may  become  My  disciples , may  mean  my  imitators 
in  zeal  and  preaching  the  Gospel.  A disciple  is  put  for  an  imitator, 
because  it  is  the  part  of  a disciple  to  imitate  his  master.  And  so 
the  disciples  did  imitate  Christ,  by  giving  themselves  up  even  unto 
death  to  preach  the  Gospel. 

Ver.  9. — As  the  Father  hath  loved  Me,  &c. — This  is  the  sixth  reason 
by  which  Christ  stirs  his  disciples  up  to  persevere  in  Him  and  in 
His  love  and  faith.  The  word  as  does  not  imply  equality,  but 
similitude  of  love.  For  the  Father  loveth  Christ  far  more  than 
Christ  loveth  us.  The  meaning  therefore  is,  As  God  the  Father 
hath  loved  Me  as  man  without  any  merits  of  mine  freely  before  all 
others,  and  hath  raised  me  to  the  Hypostasis  of  the  Word,  that  I 
should  be  the  Son  of  God,  the  Saviour  and  Redeemer  of  the  world, 
and  therefore  not  a natural  vine  but  a Vine  of  salvation,  so  in  like 
manner  have  I freely  chosen  you  before  other  men,  without  any 
merits  of  your  own,  and  raised  you  to  the  Apostolate,  that  ye  should 
be  made  very  near  to  Me  as  branches  to  the  Vine,  and  that  I through 
you  should  work  out  the  salvation  of  all  nations.  Take  heed  there- 
fore that  ye  abide  in  this  My  love.  And  this  ye  will  do  by  loving 
Me  and  keeping  my  commandments.  For  so  ye  will  deserve  to  be 
loved  in  return  by  Me,  and  be  by  Me  constantly  endowed  with  the 
benefits  of  which  I have  spoken.  So  S.  Augustine. 

Observe  here,  that  Christ’s  predestination,  election,  love,  and 
grace  are  the  means,  the  end,  and  exemplar  of  our  predestination, 
election,  love,  and  grace.  See  what  I have  said  on  Rom.  L 4. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


TO  ABIDE  IN  LOVE. 


131 

Abide  ye  in  My  love;  take  care  that  I always  love  you.  For  it  is 
a great  thing  to  be  loved  by  Christ.  It  is  the  fount  and  the  cause 
of  all  graces.  This  is  the  active  sense  of  the  word  My.  But 
Rupertus  here  takes  the  love  of  Christ  in  a passive  sense,  meaning, 
abide  in  My  love,  advance  in  My  love.  This  is  an  apposite,  but 
not  the  direct  meaning.  It  is  inferential,  thus,  Take  care  that  I 
love  you.  And  this  ye  will  be  careful  about  if  ye  proceed  to  love 
Me.  For  I love  those  that  love  Me.  Wherefore  as  the  Father 
greatly  loves  Me,  and  so  works  through  Me  so  many  miracles  and 
the  salvation  of  the  world,  so  also  do  I exceedingly  love  you,  and 
therefore  heap  upon  you  so  many  benefits,  gifts,  and  apostolic 
jgraces.  Take  heed  then  that  ye  continue  in  this  My  love  and 
My  grace.  For  so  shall  ye  receive  a daily  increase  of  gifts  from 
Me.  Perceive  from  this  the  excellence  and  Divine  virtue  of  love 
and  affection.  As  Climacus  says  ( Gradu  30),  “I  contemplate  faith 
as  a ray  of  the  sun,  charity  like  its  orb  in  its  fulness.  Charity  from 
its  own  very  nature  is  likeness  to  God,  so  far  as  mortals  can  attain 
unto  it.  As  regards  its  efficacy  it  is  a sort  of  intoxication  of  the 
soul.  Lastly,  as  regards  its  properties,  it  is  the  fountain  of  faith, 
the  abyss  of  a just  and  patient  mind,  a sea  of  humility, 

10.  If  ye  keep  my  commandments , &c.  If  ye  advance  in  loving 
Me  and  keeping  my  commandments,  ye  shall  abide  in  My  grace, 
favour,  and  affection,  so  that  I shall  proceed  to  heap  My  love 
and  favours  upon  you. 

Ver.  11. — Even  as  I have  kept  My  Father’s  commandments , &c. 
That  is,  as  I proceed  to  obey  the  Father’s  commandments,  and  to  pre- 
serve His  grace  and  love  towards  Me.  Hear  St.  Augustine  : “ Love 
precedes  the  keeping  of  commandments.  For  he  who  loveth  not 
hath  nothing  from  whence  he  may  keep  them.  In  what  therefore  He 
here  saith  He  does  not  show  from  whence  love  is  generated,  but  how 
it  is  shown,  that  no  one  may  deceive  himself  by  saying  that  he  loves 
Him  when  he  keeps  not  His  commandments.  This,  however,  must 
be  referred  to  the  love  wherewith  He  loves  us,  thus:  By  this  ye 
shall  know  that  ye  abide  in  the  love  with  which  I love  you,  if  ye 
keep  My  precepts,  not  indeed  that  we  first  keep  His  commandments 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


*32 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XV. 


in  order  that  He  may  love  us,  but  that  unless  He  loved  us  we  could 
not  keep  His  commandments.  This  is  the  grace  which  is  plain  to 
the  humble,  but  hidden  from  the  proud.” 

Prior  therefore  is  that  love  of  God  which  is  the  cause  of  love  in 
us,  and  of  the  keeping  His  commandments.  And  this  in  turn  is  the 
cause  of  God's  love  towards  us  being  maintained.  So  fire  kindles 
and  burns  wood,  and  by  its  ignition  is  preserved  and  lasts. 

Ver.  ii. — These  things  have  1 spoken  unto  you,  &c.  This  is  the 
seventh  and  last  reason  of  Christ,  by  which  He  persuades  them  to 
abide  in  His  love  and  charity.  Because  in  so  doing  they  would 
give  great  joy  both  to  Christ  and  to  themselves. 

You  will  ask,  what  is  this  joy?  ist.  Jansen  explains  thus,  These 
things  I have  said  unto  you  that  your  joy  may  be  always  like  unto 
mine.  My  joy  is  because  I am  loved  of  My  Father.  Do  you  so 
keep  My  commandments  that  ye  may  be  always  loved  of  My  Father 
and  rejoice,  and  that  thus  your  joy  may  be  full  through  My  Resur- 
rection and  the  sending  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

2d.  S.  Cyril  explains,  These  things  have  I spoken  unto  you 
that  ye  may  have  joy  in  those  things  in  which  I have  joy,  namely,  in 
labours  and  perils  endured  for  the  salvation  of  mankind. 

3d.  S.  Augustine  expounds  of  the  joy  which  God  had  from 
eternity  at  our  salvation,  thus,  “ These  things  have  I spoken  unto 
you  that  what  has  been  from  eternity,  a cause  of  joy  to  Me,  namely, 
grace  and  salvation,  may  be  in  you.  And  that  your  joy  which  you 
have  in  My  company  may  be  fulfilled  by  your  gradual  advancement 
to  everlasting  felicity.”  And  he  again  says,  “ What  is  that  joy  of 
ours  which  He  says  is  to  be  full,  but  to  enjoy  His  company  ? He 
indeed  had  perfect  joy  over  us  when  He  rejoiced  in  His  fore- 
knowledge and  predestination  of  us.  But  that  joy  was  not  our  joy, 
because  we  were  not  yet  in  being.  This  joy  began  to  be  in  us 
when  He  called  us.  It  begins  to  be  in  the  faith  of  those  who  are 
born  again : it  shall  be  full  in  the  faith  of  those  who  rise  again.” 

4th.  And  most  plainly,  Christ  here  brings  His  disciples  a 
twofold  joy  as  a reward.  The  first  joy  is  His  own,  the  second  that 
of  the  disciples.  The  meaning  is,  These  things  have  I spoken  unto 


Christ’s  joy  in  us. 


*33 


you  that  in  doing  them  ye  may  give  Me  joy.  For  parents  and 
masters  rejoice  when  they  see  their  children  and  scholars  act  aright 
in  obedience  to  their  commands.  This  is  the  meaning  of,  that  My 
jay  may  be  in  you , namely,  that  I may  rejoice  at  your  conformity  to 
My  will.  As  S.  Augustine  says,  “ What  is  the  joy  of  Christ  in  us 
save  that  wherein  He  deigns  to  rejoice  concerning  us?”  The 
second  joy  is  that  of  the  disciples,  concerning  which  He  says,  And 
that  your  joy  may  be  jull.  This  was  the  joy  which  the  disciples  had 
in  Christ,  that  they  were  His  disciples.  Christ  has  reference  to  the 
explanation  which  He  subjoins  to  the  parable  of  the  vine  and  its 
branches,  Abide  in  Me,  and  I in  you . The  meaning  is,  Like  as  the 
vine,  if  it  could  rejoice,  would  rejoice  because  its  branches  abode  in 
it,  and  bore  fruit,  and  as  the  branches  for  their  part  would  rejoice 
because  they  adhered  to  the  vine,  and  derived  sap  from  it  to  bring 
forth  grapes,  so  likewise  if  ye,  O ye  disciples,  abide  in  Me,  the  true 
Vine,  by  love,  and  I also  abide  in  you  by  the  continual  influx  of 
the  Spirit  of  grace  for  the  bringing  forth  of  good  works,  then  shall  I 
have  joy  in  you  thus  cleaving  unto  Me,  and  ye  shall  have  joy  in  Me 
because  ye  derive  from  Me  grace  and  the  Holy  Spirit  for  the  con- 
version of  all  nations.  And  this  joy  shall  gradually  be  fulfilled  here, 
but  shall  have  its  perfect  consummation  in  eternal  glory. 

Lastly,  the  words  in  you  may  be  taken  simply,  just  as  they  stand, 
thus,  These  things  have  1 spoken  unto  you,  that  My  joy  with  which  I 
rejoice  concerning  the  glory  of  God  and  the  salvation  of  the  whole 
world  to  be  accomplished  by  Me,  I may  transfuse  into  you  as  My 
Apostles  and  fellow-workers;  and  that  this  joy  may  increase  as  your 
labours  and  your  fruit  increase  ; until  it  be  fulfilled  in  this  life,  but 
yet  more  completely  in  the  life  to  come.  For  My  good  is  your 
good,  as  the  good  of  the  Vine  is  the  good  of  its  branches. 

This  meaning  seems  the  simplest,  and  is  therefore  sound.  The 
words,  That  my  joy  may  be  in  you , are  exactly  as  if  He  said,  That 
My  joy  may  flow  into  you,  may  be  communicated  to  you,  and  so  be 
made  your  own. 

Admirably  saith  S.  Bernard  (Epist.  114),  “Verily  that  is  the  true 
and  only  joy  which  comes  not  from  a creature,  but  from  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


*34 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XV. 


Creator,  and  which  no  one  shall  take  away  from  him  who  possesses 
it  Compared  with  this  all  other  gladness  is  only  sorrow ; all  other 
pleasantness  is  pain,  all  sweetness  bitter,  all  beauty  but  as  ugliness.” 
And  elsewhere  he  says,  “ A sure  sign  of  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  in  the  soul  is  spiritual  joy.”  For  the  soul  which  exults  in 
God  exults  because  God  inhabits  it. 

Ver.  13. — This  is  My  commandment &c.  The  Greek  is  emphatic 
with  the  double  art.,  i n fat,  i.e.  My  precept , even  Mine.  This 
is  to  be  referred  partly  to  the  words,  if  ye  keep  My  commandments , 
partly  to,  in  My  love,  which  is  the  scope  of  the  whole  parable  from 
the  beginning  of  the  chapter  to  this  place.  The  meaning  therefore 
is,  I have  commanded  you  to  keep  My  precepts,  among  which  know 
ye  that  the  chief  is  this,  that  ye  love  one  another  as  I have  loved  you. 
Again,  I have  bidden  you,  Abide  in  My  love, , i.e.  continue  and  per- 
severe in  loving  Me.  And  this  ye  will  do  if  ye  love  one  another,  and 
bestow  your  kindnesses  and  offices  of  charity  upon  your  neighbours. 
For  ye  can  bestow  nothing  upon  Me,  but  whatsoever  ye  shall  bestow 
upon  them,  I shall  account  as  bestowed  upon  Myself  as  the  Parent  of 
all.  Wherefore  He  calls  this  “My  commandment.”  There  is  an 
allusion  to  His  words  in  xiii.  34,  A new  commandment  I give  unto 
you , &c.  For  what  He  here  calls  My  commandment  He  there  calls 
a new  commandment.  For  He  gives  this  precept  to  all  Christians. 
For  all  were  represented  by  the  Apostles.  For  Christ  willed  by  the 
Apostles  and  their  successors  to  convert  the  whole  world.  He  bids 
them  therefore  that  out  of  love  to  Him  they  should  love  and  seek  the 
salvation  of  all  nations,  should  expend  all  their  faculties  and  labours 
upon  that  work,  undergo  all  perils,  sustain  all  persecutions,  and 
lastly,  should  shed  their  blood  for  it  For  so  He  loved  them  and  all 
other  men  that  He  gave  His  life  and  endured  the  death  of  the  Cross 
for  them.  Moreover,  this  precept  in  the  first  place  concerned  the 
Apostles,  because  Christ  by  them  was  about  to  accomplish  His  own 
work  of  preaching  throughout  the  world.  Wherefore  it  was  the 
duty  of  every  one  to  co-operate  with  and  assist  every  other.  For 
this  union  and  mutual  co-operation  of  many  was  most  efficacious 
for  overcoming  all  difficulties,  and  converting  all  nations  however 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  SUPREME  LOVE  OF  CHRIST.  1 35 

barbarous.  And  so  we  see  the  same  thing  at  the  present  day  in 
Religious  Orders  and  in  Religious  and  Apostolic  men  united  among 
themselves.  Thus  it  is  said  (Eccles.  iv.  12.),  “A  threefold  cord  is 
not  quickly  broken.” 

This  example  of  Christ  was  followed  by  S.  Elizius,  who  died  in  the 
year  665.  This  was  his  last  admonition  to  his  people,  as  Sigobert 
testifies  in  his  Chronicle : “ If  ye  would  pay  me  back  my  love  for 
you,  keep  the  commandments  of  Almighty  God.  Always  breathe 
after  Jesus  Christ.  Fix  firmly  His  precepts  in  your  minds.  Love 
His  name  even  as  I have  done.” 

Ver.  13. — Greater  love  hath  no  man , &c.  Christ  here  sets  forth 
the  manner  and  terminus  or  extremity  of  His  love  wherewith  He 
loves  us,  and  of  that  wherewith  He  wills  that  we  should  love  one 
another.  As  though  He  said,  I have  supremely  loved  you,  therefore 
I require  the  same  of  you,  and  have  a right  to  ask  it,  that  ye  should 
supremely  love  one- another.  For  the  highest  and  supreme  love  is 
that  in  which  a man  not  only  gives  his  substance,  but  his  life,  that 
is,  freely  offers  and  lays  it  down  for  his  friends.  This  I do  for  you, 
i.e.  I will  presently  lay  down  My  life  for  you.  Do  you  therefore  in 
like  manner  give  your  lives  for  your  friends  and  neighbours  in  such 
a manner  that  ye  do  not  refuse,  but  welcome,  all  labours,  perils, 
persecutions,  and  every  kind  of  torment  and  death  for  their 
salvation. 

You  may  say,  it  is  greater  charity  if  any  one  lay  down  his  life  for 
his  enemies  than  that  he  lay  it  down  for  his  friends.  Some  reply  to 
this  by  saying  that  the  meaning  is,  There  cannot  be  among  men  a 
greater  love  than  to  die  for  a friend,  but  Mine  is  a greater  love  for 
you,  because  I die  for  My  enemies.  To  say  for  enemies  was 
unnecessary,  for  it  is  never  done  among  men.  Whereas  the  friend- 
ship of  Pylades  and  Orestes  in  being  willing  to  die  for  one  another 
is  the  theme  of  every  one’s  praise,  as  something  exceeding  rare.  And 
this  is  S.  Paul’s  argument  {Rom.  v.) : “ For  scarcely  for  a just  man  doth 
any  one  die : but  perchance  some  one  would  dare  to  die  for  a good 
man.  But  God  commends  His  love  to  us,”  &c. 

jst.  And  better  Ribera  and  Toletus  explain : The  compari- 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XV. 


,136 

son  here  is  not  between  friends  and  enemies,  but  between  the  acts 
of  friendship,  thus : Among  all  the  acts  and  offices  of  friendship, 
none  is  greater  than  this,  that  any  one  should  lay  down  his  life  for 
his  friend.  This  I am  about  to  do  for  you,  who  are  My  friends  if 
ye  keep  My  commandments. 

2d.  And  most  fully : friends  are  here  called  not  those  who  love, 
but  those  who  are  loved,  such  as  may  even  be  enemies,  it  means, 
greater  love  there  cannot  be  than  his  who  dies  for  his  friends,  i.e. 
for  those  whom  he  loves  and  accounts  his  friends,  even  though  they 
in  fact  be  not  his  friends  but  his  enemies.  Thus  Christ  laid  down 
His  life  upon  the  Cross  for  all  men,  who  at  the  first  were  sinners 
and  therefore  his  enemies.  But  many  of  them,  through  that  death 
of  His,  and  the  grace  which  floweth  from  it,  have  been  justified, 
and  so  become  His  friends  and  disciples.  The  Apostles  and 
Apostolic  men  following  Christ  have  done  the  same.  And  all 
Christians  whatsoever  ought  to  do  the  like,  namely,  when  the  salva- 
tion of  a neighbour's  soul  is  in  peril,  to  expose  their  lives  to  rescue 
it,  even  though  the  neighbour  be  an  enemy. 

You  may  urge,  Why  then  does  Christ  call  them  friends  rather  than 
enemies?  I reply,  1st,  Because  He  was  speaking  to  the  Apostles, 
who  by  His  vocation  and  grace  were  His  friends,  although  theyiiad 
before  been  sinners  and  enemies.  2d,  Rupert  answers,  “ that  by  the 
sweetness  of  His  manner  of  speaking  He  might  instil  into  His 
hearers  the  sweetness  of  the  love  which  He  commanded  them.” 
3d,  To  teach  us  that  so  far  as  Christ  and  we  are  concerned  all  men 
must  be  loved  as  friends,  even  though  they  on  their  part  are  hostile  to 
us.  For  the  love  of  Christ  extends  itself  to  all,  enemies  as  well  as 
friends.  Wherefore  He  accounts  His  enemies  friends  and  beloved, 
and  by  this  means  gains  them  to  be  friends  instead  of  enemies  to 
God  and  Himself.  For  love  is  the  magnet  of  love.  Nor  can  there 
be  anything  more  mighty  than  love,  for  love  forces  enemies  to  win 
back  love  to  him  who  loves  them. 

Lastly,  there  are  some  who  understand  this  saying  of  Christ  not 
only  concerning  spiritual  and  eternal  salvation,  but  also  concerning 
what  is  corporeal  and  temporal.  They  say  that  it  is  an  act  of  heroic 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  PRESBYTER  SANCTULUS. 


13 1 

charity  if  any  one  gives  his  temporal  life  for  the  temporal  life  of  his 
neighbour.  For  this  is  permitted,  indeed  sometimes  persuaded,  in 
the  order  of  charity.  Wherefore  S.  Gregory  {Dial.  1.  3.  c.  37) 
praises  a certain  presbyter  named  Sanctulus  who  offered  to  die 
instead  of  a certain  deacon  who  had  been  condemned  to  death  by 
the  Lombards.  But  God  held  the  hand  of  the  executioner,  so  that 
he  could  not  bring  down  his  uplifted  sword  upon  his  neck.  The 
Lombards  were  struck  with  amazement,  and  began  to  reverence  him 
as  a Saint  And  at  his  request  they  set  all  their  captives  free. 
Such  was  the  power  of  charity  that  a man  by  the  offer  of  his  own 
life  redeemed  the  lives  of  many. 

Ye  are  My  friends  if  ye  do  (Gr.),  i.e  if  ye  shall  do , &c.  This 
sentence  refers  to  what  precedes,  Thus,  I lay  down  My  life  for  you 
as  My  friends.  Do  you  in  return  render  love  for  love,  loving  Me 
as  My  friends  who  have  loved  you.  And  this  ye  will  do  if  ye  keep 
My  commandments,  amongst  which  the  chief,  and  embracing  all  the 
rest,  is,  that  ye  love  one  another. 

Ver.  14. — I will  not  henceforth  call  you  servants : for  the  servant 
knoweth  not  what  his  lord  doeth , i.e.  what  he  intends  and  proposes  to  do. 

Ver.  15. — But  I have  called  you  friends . S.  Augustine  {Tract.  85) 
inquires  in  what  way  this  is  true : for  the  Apostles  really  continued 
to  be  servants  of  Christ,  and  in  the  day  of  judgment  He  will  say 
to  them,  as  well  as  others,  Well  done , good  and  faithful  servants.  He 
answers,  that  there  is  a twofold  kind  of  servitude,  the  one  that  which 
slaves  render  to  their  lords  through  fear,  the  other  free  and  filial, 
which  children  render  to  their  parents.  The  Apostles  were  not  the 
servants  of  Christ  according  to  the  former  fashion,  but  the  latter. 
For  in  this  way  servants  become  friends.  To  this  may  be  added 
what  Rupert  says,  I will  not  call  you  servants , i.e.  sinners  and 
enemies,  because,  by  Baptism  and  My  grace,  I have  made  you 
righteous  and  My  friends. 

The  true  and  genuine  meaning  then  is  this : Although  by  your 
nature  and  condition  ye  are  My  servants,  yet  I bestow  upon  you 
such  honour  that  I will  make  you  and  call  you  My  intimate  and 
most  trusted  friends,  insomuch  that  all  things  which  I have  heard  of 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


138  S.  JOHN,  C.  XV. 

My  Father  that  I as  His  ambassador  should  communicate  to  men, 
I will  communicate ; not  to  the  multitudes  nor  to  the  Scribes,  but  to 
you  alone. 

He  saith  now , because  already  when  He  was  going  away  Ho 
revealed  to  them  many  things  about  which  He  had  previously  been 
silent.  Other  things  also,  which  He  had  before  spoken  obscurely  in 
parables,  He  now  clearly  and  plainly  explained  to  them.  Now 
therefore  when  He  was  going  away,  He  manifested,  by  thus  explaining 
things  to  them,  greater  tmst  in  them  and  confidence  towards  them. 
Wherefore  He  raises  them  to  a higher  dignity,  condition  and  title, 
even  that  of  friends.  This  then  is  the  reason  which  Christ  Himself 
here  gives.  He  does  not  therefore  deny  that  they  still  continued  to 
be  servants,  but  He  asserts  that,  servants  though  they  were,  He 
raised  them  up  to  be  His  intimate  friends,  and  endowed  them  with 
this  name  and  prerogative.  So  Maldonatus,  Ribera,  &c.,  but  before 
all  others  S.  Irenseus,  lib.  4.  c.  27. 

The  servant  knoweth  noif  i.e.  ordinarily  and  usually,  for  some 
masters  have  faithful  and  prudent  servants  to  whom  they  entrust 
their  counsels  and  their  secrets.  But  Christ  speaks  of  what  is  the 
ordinary  course  of  things  among  men. 

All  things  which  I have  heard  of  the  Father , &c.  You  may  say, 
This  seems  to  compete  with  what  Christ  had  said  a little  before  in 
the  1 2 th  chapter,  I have  yet  many  things  to  say  unto  you,  but  ye  can- 
not bear  them  now.  Leontius  answers  that  Christ  now  revealed  to 
the  Apostles  all  things  which  the  Father  wished  Him  at  that  time  to 
reveal  to  them,  that  is  to  say,  all  things  which  they  were  v able  to 
receive.  2d,  And  better,  S.  Augustine  and  Bede  answer,  that  I have 
made  known  means  I will  presently  make  known , i.e.  after  fifty  days, 
at  Pentecost. 

Somewhat  differently  Maldonatus,  1 have  made  known , i.e.  I have 
determined  to  make  known , namely,  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  whom  I am 
about  to  send. 

Moraliter:  learn  from  the  saying  of  Christ  that  holy  souls  which 
are  full  of  love  to  God,  which,  treading  all  earthly  things  under  foot, 
dwell  in  heaven,  and  hold  familiar  converse  with  God  in  prayer, 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


CHRIST  FIRST  CHOOSES  US. 


139 


such  talk  frequently  with  God  as  His  friends,  such  are  illuminated  by 
God,  so  that  they  hear  and  learn  of  Him  His  deepest  mysteries  and 
secret  counsels.  These  men  understand  the  Holy  Scriptures.  They 
learn  of  Him  what  He  purposes  to  do  in  the  time  to  come,  as 
though  they  were  admitted  into  the  inner  presence-chamber  of  God, 
and  were  there  made  members  of  His  Privy  Council.  Such  were 
Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Daniel,  and  the  rest  of  the  Prophets.  S.  Bernard 
eloquently  unfolds  this  teaching  ( Tract. . de  Interior . Dom.  c.  69). 
“ Wouldst  thou  know,  O soul,  whosoever  thou  art,  that  the  sublimity 
of  the  Divine  revelations  is  a manifest  proof  of  the  Divine  love? 
Now  I will  not  call  you  servants , He  saith,  but  friends,  because  all 
things  which  I have  heard  of  My  Father  I have  made  known  unto  you. 
Labour  therefore  to  love  Thy  God  closely  and  supremely.  Pant 
every  hour  with  thine  utmost  longing  for  the  joy  of  Divine  con- 
templation. Gather  thyself  into  thyself,  rest  only  in  the  desire  for 
God.”  S.  Basil,  S.  Maximus,  and  others,  have  the  same  teaching. 
S.  Francis,  S.  Catherine  of  Sienna,  S.  Francis  Xavier,  and  very 
many  others,  by  means  of  this  loving  friendship  and  converse  with 
God,  obtained  the  gifts  of  understanding  and  prophecy.  So  too  in 
the  olden  time  did  Henoch,  Noe,  Abraham,  Moses,  and  others, 
because  they  walked  with  God  and  conversed  familiarly  with  Him, 
speaking  to  Him  as  a friend  with  his  friend. 

Ver.  16. — Ye  have  not  chosen  Me,  &c.  S.  Augustine,  both  on  this 
passage  and  elsewhere  (lib.  1,  c.  17,  de  Predest.  Sand.)  understands 
by  this  choosing  the  predestination  of  God : I have  predestinated 
you,  and  chosen  you,  without  any  merits  of  yours,  to  glory.  But  this 
does  not  agree  rightly  with  the  words,  ye  have  not  chosen  Me.  For 
neither  could  the  Apostles  choose  Christ  to  heavenly  glory,  nor 
does  Christ  here  seem  to  have  wished  to  reveal  His  predestination 
to  the  Apostles.  For  this  He  Himself  is  wont  to  attribute  to  the 
Father.  For  to  the  Father  providence  is  attributed,  a part  of  which 
is  predestination. 

More  literally  the  meaning  is,  Ye  did  not  first  choose  Me  for  your 
Master  and  Lord,  but  I first  chose  and  called  you,  and  by  My 
vocation  and  grace  I made  you  My  friends,  disciples,  and  Apostles. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


140 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XV. 


So  S.  Cyril,  Chrysostom,  and  others.  Wherefore  S.  Chrysostom  thinks 
that  Christ  is  here  still  dwelling  upon  the  parable  of  the  vine  and 
its  branches.  The  meaning  then  will  be,  As  the  husbandman 
chooses  the  best  vines  and  grafts  to  plant  in  his  vineyard,  so  have  I 
chosen  you,  O My  Apostles,  that  I should  plant  you,  being  made  the 
most  excellent  vines  by  My  grace,  in  My  vineyard,  for  the  production 
of  grapes,  i.e.  of  very  many  and  very  excellent  believers. 

Moreover,  Christ  saith  this,  ist,  To  show  His  exceeding  love  for 
His  Apostles,  because  He  first  chose  them  alone,  above  all  other 
men  who  were  more  noble,  learned,  and  eloquent,  to  be  Apostles,  i.e. 
to  be  His  chief  friends,  and  the  Apostles  of  His  Church.  Wherefore 
He  tacitly  admonishes  them  that  they  should  love  Him  in  return, 
and  abide  constant  in  His  love  and  obedience. 

2d.  That  considering  the  lofty  height  of  their  dignity  and 
apostleship  to  which  they  had  been  called  by  Christ,  they  should 
labour  to  be  true  to  it,  and  so  should  be  beforehand  with  all 
nations,  and  by  their  preaching  should  bring  them  to  Christ. 

Some  writers  add  that  Christ  here  wished  to  give  the  Apostles  an 
incentive  to  humility  : thus,  Be  it  that  I have  called  you  friends, 
and  admitted  you  to  share  in  My  secrets,  yet  do  not  ye  be  proud 
because  of  this.  For  ye  have  not  merited  it,  but  it  is  I who  have 
freely  chosen  and  exalted  you. 

And  I have  placed  you  that  ye  should  go  (to  preach  the  gospel 
throughout  all  nations)  and  bring  forth  fruity  &c.  S.  Chrysostom 
being  of  opinion  that  there  is  an  allusion  here  to  the  parable  of  the 
Vine,  explains  the  words  / have  placed , to  mean,  1 have  planted , as 
it  were  fruitful  vines  in  the  vineyard  of  My  Church.  Maldonatus 
explains  more  simply,  1 have  declared \ For  when  any  one  is  made 
a magistrate,  he  is  first  chosen,  that  is,  designated,  and  settled  in 
his  office. 

Most  simply,  you  may  expound  I have  placed  by  I have  constituted 
you,  or  that  Christ  by  this  word  signifies  the  authority,  the  firmness, 
and  the  fruit  of  His  Apostles,  namely,  that  they  were  commissioned, 
and  therefore  made  strong,  by  Christ,  so  that  no  one  could 
deprive  them  of  their  dignity,  nor  hinder  their  bringing  forth  fruit, 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THAT  FRUIT  MAY  REMAIN.  I4I 

even  a most  abundant  harvest  of  souls  throughout  the  whole 
world. 

And  that  your  fruit  may  remain : Cyril  refers  this  to  the  Gospel 
which  remains,  whilst  the  old  Law  was  not  to  abide,  but  to  be 
abrogated  by  Christ  More  plainly  and  fully,  you  may  refer  the 
word  abide  to  the  conversion  of  all  nations  brought  about  by  the 
Apostles,  which  remained  even  after  their  death,  and  which  will 
remain  in  due  and  continual  succession  unto  the  end  of  the  world. 
And  this  as  it  were  the  heavenly  fruit  and  reward  of  the  Apostles 
does  remain,  and  will  remain  eternally. 

That  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  the  Father  in  My  Name , &c.  The  word 
that  signifies  not  so  much  the  end  aimed  at  as  the  effect.  The 
meaning  is  this,  If  ye  bring  forth  the  fruit  for  which  I have  chosen 
you,  it  will  follow  and  come  to  pass  that  the  Father  will  give  you 
whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  the  same  sense  that  I have  shown  (chap, 
xiv.  13).  The  Greek  for  / may  give  is  35,  which  may  be  rendered, 
with  S.  Chrysostom  and  Theophylact,  in  the  first  person,  I may  give . 
Wherefore  Theophylact  gathers  from  this  passage  against  the  Arians 
that  the  Son  of  God  is  of  the  same  substance  with  the  Father,  so 
that  He  equally  with  the  Father  gives  as  God  the  things  which  are 
asked  of  Him.  In  My  Name , i.e.  by  My  merits.  Moreover,  S. 
Augustine  says,  “ That  which  we  ask  in  the  Saviour’s  name  is  what 
pertains  to  salvation.” 

Ver.  1 7. — These  things  / command  you , &c.  He  says  these  filings  in 
the  plural  to  signify  that  there  were  indeed  many  particular  pre- 
cepts commanded  by  Him,  but  that  all  of  them  were  included  in  the 
one  common  and  easy  precept  of  love,  so  that  if  one  fulfils  that,  one 
fulfils  all 

Secondly,  You  may  explain  more  simply  with  S.  Chrysostom  if 
you  take  the  conjunction  that  to  signify  the  end.  Then  the  mean- 
ing will  be,  These  things  which  I have  spoken  concerning  My  love 
I have  said  with  this  only  end  in  view,  that  ye  should  have  mutual 
love  among  yourselves,  and  that  thus  ye  should  endure  all  things 
for  the  salvation  of  men.  To  this  pertains  the  exposition  of  S. 
Augustine  (Tract.  87),  “ Because  He  had  said,  / have  placed  you 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


142 


S.  JOHN,  c.  XV. 


that  ye  should  go  and  bear  fruit , now  He  saith,  These  things  1 com- 
mand you , wishing  to  teach  that  the  fruit  which  we  are  to  bear  must 
be  love  of  our  neighbour.”  And  again,  “The  fruit  of  the  Spirit, 
saith  the  apostle,  is  charity.  Concerning  this  therefore  He  gives 
commandment.  Deservedly  indeed  does  He  often  speak  of  love, 
as  if  it  were  the  only  thing  to  be  commanded,  as  being  that  without 
which  all  other  good  things  cannot  profit,  and  which  we  cannot 
have  without  having  all  other  good  things  by  which  a man  becomes 
good  with  it” 

Ver.  1 8. — If  the  world  hate  you,  &c.  . . . it  first  hated  Me.  The 
Greek  is  cr^Sjro v v/am,  which  is  best  rendered  adverbially,  meaning, 
the  world  hated  Me  before  it  hated  you.  I have  trodden  before  you 
this  path  of  hatred,  and  made  it  smooth  for  you,  so  that  ye,  following 
Me,  may  walk  joyfully  in  the  same  way.  For  I give  Myself  to  you 
not  only  as  your  companion  in  persecutions,  but  your  standard- 
bearer,  your  leader  and  your  guide.  Worldly  people  He  calls  the 
world.  By  them  He  means  ist,  The  Jews.  2d,  Gentiles  addicted 
to  the  spirit  of  the  world,  and  therefore  enemies  of  the  doctrine  and 
spirit  of  Christ 

Christ  forewarns  His  Apostles  against  the  impending  hatred  and 
persecutions  of  the  Jews  and  Gentiles.  For  the  darts  which  are 
foreseen  are  less  apt  to  strike.  Thus  they  would  nobly  overcome, 
yea,  despise  them,  and  would  glory  in  them  as  the  tokens  of  Christ. 
It  is,  as  Ribera  remarks,  as  though  He  said,  Do  not  wonder  or  be 
troubled  when  the  world  hates  you.  It  hated  Me  before  you. 
Rejoice  because  ye  are  partakers  with  Me.  This  hatred  shall  do 
you  no  harm,  even  as  it  has  not  hurt  Me.  The  world  persecutes 
you  because  ye  are  not  of  it,  i.e.  because  ye  do  not  favour  its 
works,  but  oppose  them,  as  I do.  And  when  He  saith  this,  He 
leaves  it  to  be  understood,  But  I nevertheless  will  love  you,  because 
ye  belong  to  Me,  and  are  My  elect,  chosen  to  condemn  the  works 
of  the  world.  Far  greater  shall  be  to  you  the  benefit  of  My  love 
than  the  harm  of  the  worlds  hate. 

Great  then  is  this  consolation  which  the  members  derive  from 
their  Head.  Listen  to  S.  Cyprian  (lib.  4,  Epist.  6),  “ The  Son  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  PROOF  OF  VIRTUE. 


HJ 

God  hath  suffered  that  He  might  make  us  sons  of  God.  And  shall 
a son  of  man  not  be  willing  to-  suffer  that  he  may  persevere  in  being 
a son  of  God  ? If  we  labour  under  the  world’s  hate,  Christ  bore 
this  hatred  before  us.  If  we  endure  shame  in  this  world,  or  banish- 
ment, or  torture,  the  world’s  Maker  and  its  Master  experienced  yet 
more  grievous  trials.  He  it  is  who  admonishes  us,  saying,  If  the 
world  hate  you,  remember  that  it  first  hated  Me” 

Lastly,  hear  S.  Bernard  (Horn,  47,  in  Cant.),  “Thou  art  two 
things  to  Me,  O Lord  Jesus,  a mirror  of  endurance,  and  a reward 
of  suffering.  Thou  art  the  pattern  of  the  warrior,  and  the  glory  of 
the  victor.  Thou  teachest  my  hands  to  war  by  the  example  of 
Thine  own  valour.  Thou  crownest  my  head  after  the  victory  by 
the  presence  of  Thy  majesty.” 

Ver.  19. — If  ye  were  of  the  world , &c.  Christ  here  adds  another 
reason,  says  Chrysostom,  showing  that  it  is  a proof  of  virtue  to  be 
hated  by  the  world,  and  of  wickedness  to  be  loved  by  it  The 
meaning  is,  if  ye  loved  riches,  honours,  pleasures,  lusts,  such  as  the 
world  loves,  it  would  love  you  as  being  like  itself.  But  since  it  sees 
you  loving  the  things  which  are  contrary  to  its  base  desires,  and 
teaching  contempt  for  earthly  pleasures,  honours,  and  lusts,  therefore 
it  hateth  you.  For  agreement  in  character  and  desires  is  a cause 
of  love,  dissimilarity  a cause  of  aversion  and  hatred. 

S.  Augustine  considers  an  objection  which  may  be  raised.  The 
wicked  persecute  the  wicked : unrighteous  kings  and  judges  punish 
murderers  and  adulterers.  Then  he  gives  this  answer.  The  world 
indeed  hates  its  own  so  far  as  this,  that  it  injures  the  wicked.  But 
still  it  loves  them,  in  that  it  favours  them.  To  me  it  seems  another 
answer  may  be  given : worldly  men  love  their  own,  that  is,  those 
who  help  and  share  in  their  designs.  If  at  any  time  they  hate  other 
worldly  persons,  it  is  because  they  oppose  their  designs,  and  so  are 
counted  their  adversaries.  And  therefore  they  hated  Christ  because 
He  reproved  their  deeds,  and  exposed  them  to  men.  For  the  same 
cause  they  hated  the  Apostles. 

Ver.  20. — Remember  My  word,  &c.  For  if  I suffer  the  hatred  of 
the  Jews,  yea  even  the  death  of  the  Cross,  ye  ought  not  to  be 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


unwilling  to  undergo  the  same!  For  as  S.  Peter  saith,  “ Christ 
hath  suffered  for  us,  leaving  us  an  example  that  we  should  follow 
His  steps.” 

If  they  have  persecuted  Me,  &c.  If  they  have  kept  My  word ’ &c. 
My  word \ i.e.  My  doctrine,  law,  and  precepts. 

But  all  these  things  will  they  do  because  of  My  name , i.e.  on  My 
account,  because  ye  are  called,  and  are,  Mine. 

Because  they  know  not  Him  that  sent  Me : i.e.,  Because  they  know 
not  that  God  the  Father  sent  Me,  they  say  that  I pretend  to  be 
the  Son  of  God,  and  sent  by  Him  into  the  world  as  the  Messias. 
For  if  they  knew  and  believed  this,  they  would  not  persecute  Me, 
nor  dare  to  fight  against  God.  He  means,  This  will  be  glorious  for 
you,  that  not  only  for  My  sake,  but  for  God  the  Father’s  sake,  who 
sent  Me,  ye  will  endure  persecutions. 

Ver.  22. — If  1 had  not  come  and  spoken,  &c.,  they  would  not  have  sin, 
&c.  Sin,  viz.  of  unbelief  and  hatred,  in  that  they  calumniate,  and  are 
hostile  to,  My  doctrine  and  life.  Observe  : the  Scribes  and  Pharisees 
before  Christ  came  had  true  faith,  not  only  in  God,  but  also  in 
Christ  as  about  to  come.  But  when  He  did  come  they  would  not 
acknowledge  Him,  because  they  saw  Him  poor  and  lowly,  and 
because  He  reproved  their  vices.  Wherefore  they  then  became 
unbelievers,  and  lost  the  faith  by  their  own  obstinacy.  For  Jesus 
abundantly  proved  to  them  that  He  was  the  Christ,  wherefore  they 
were  without  excuse  because  they  believed  Him  not. 

Ver.  23. — He  that  hateth  Me  hateth  My  Father  also,  because  I am 
come  as  sent  by  the  Father,  and  I have  spoken  the  things  which 
He  wished  Me  to  speak.  Wherefore  by  despising  and  hating  Me, 
they  despise  and  hate  God  the  Father.  As  he  who  despiseth  an 
ambassador  despises  the  king  who  sends  him. 

Ver.  25. — But  that  the  word  may  be  fulfilled  which  is  written  in 
their  law  {i.e.,  in  the  Old  Test.,  viz.  Ps.  lix.  5,  and  xxv.  29),  they  hated 
Me  gratis  (Vulg.),  i.e.  without  a cause,  without  My  fault,  and  therefore 
wickedly  and  unjustly.  For  I have  given  them  no  other  cause  of 
hate,  but  supremest  love.  Observe  the  word  that  does  not  signify 
the  end  intended,  but  denotes  that  which  happened  as  a matter  of 


Digitized  by  C ^GOgl 


THE  GREEK  SCHISM. 


145 

fact  from  the  unbelief  and  obstinacy  of  the  Jews.  The  meaning  is, 
And  thus  there  followed  that  which  David  and  Isaias  foretold  would 
be,  viz.  that  the  Jews  would  without  a cause  pursue  Christ  with  hate. 

Vers.  26-27. — But  when  the  Paraclete  is  come , whom  I will  send  unto 
you  from  the  Father , &c.  He  means,  although  I have  abundantly 
demonstrated  My  divinity  to  the  Jews,  so  that  they  are  without 
excuse,  yet  will  I still  more  demonstrate  it  by  the  coming  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  who  shall  testify  concerning  Me,  coming  from  heaven  to 
you  alone  who  have  believed  in  Me,  and  to  those  who  shall  believe 
through  your  preaching,  so  that  His  advent  shall  be  made  known 
to  ail  when  they  see  you  speaking  with  tongues,  and  expounding 
the  Scriptures,  and  working  miracles.  For  ye  by  preaching  the 
Gospel  bear  testimony  ui>to  all  men  concerning  Me,  My  doctrine 
and  My  works,  since  ye  have  been  with  Me  from  the  time  that  I 
began  to  teach  and  converse  with  men. 

Whom  1 will  send  unto  you  from  the  Father . From  this  verse  the 
later  Greeks  maintain  that  the  Holy  Ghost  proceeds  from,  and  is 
breathed  by  the  Father  only,  not  the  Son  : and  therefore  they  made 
an  open  schism  from  the  Latin  Church,  a .d.  1054,  when  Michael 
the  patriarch  of  Constantinople  dared  for  this  cause  to  excommuni- 
cate the  Roman  Pontiff  and  the  Latins.  And  for  this  reason,  in  a.d. 
1453,  on  the  very  Feast  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  or  during  the  octave  of 
Whitsunday,  Constantinople  was  taken  by  the  Turks,  the  Emperor 
slain,  and  th^  empire  of  the  Greeks  brought  to  an  end.  This  there- 
fore is  the  error  of  the  Greeks ; for,  as  S.  Hilary  rightly  observes, 
(lib.  8,  de  Trin.^)  and  S.  Augustine  (lib.  4,  de  Trin.  c.  20),  this  passage 
rather  signifies  the  contrary,  namely,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  proceeds 
from  the  Father  and  the  Son.  For  this  is  the  meaning  of  whom  I 
will  send.  For  in  the  Holy  Trinity  no  Person  is  sent  by  any  othei 
unless  He  proceeds  from  Him  who  sends  Him.  Wherefore  the 
Father  is  never  said  to  be  sent  because  He  proceedeth  from  none. 
The  Son  is  said  to  be  sent  by  the  Father,  but  not  by  the  Holy 
Ghost.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  said  to  be  sent  by  the  Father  and  the 
Son,  because  He  proceedeth  from  Both  as  from  one  Principle  of 

Spiration.  So  the  ancient  Greek,  as  well  as  the  Latin,  Fathers  under- 
vol.  v.  K 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


146 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XV. 


stood  this  passage.  They  are  cited  by  the  Council  of  Florence 
( sess . 1 8 and  25),  where  a union  was  effected  between  the  Latins  and 
the  Greeks,  and  the  Greeks  admitted  that  the  Holy  Ghost  proceeds 
from  the  Father  and  the  Son.  (See  Cardinal  Bessarion's  speech  on 
behalf  of  union,  c.  7.)  Wherefore  when  it  is  only  said  in  the  creed  of 
the  Council  of  Nice,  “ I believe  in  the  Holy  Ghost,”  the  Council  ot 
Constantinople  added,  Who  proceedeth  from  the  Father \ And  when  a 
contention  arose  about  the  Son,  the  Church  added,  and  from  the  Son , 
as  the  Council  of  Florence  teaches  (sess.  7).  The  same  thing  is 
clearly  apparent  from  the  words  of  Christ  (chap,  xvi.),  All  things  what- 
soever the  Father  hath  are  Mine : wherefore  I said.  He  shall  take  of 
Mine , and  shall  show  it  unto  you.  For  if  all  things  which  the  Father 
hath  are  the  Son’s,  then  He  also  breathes  the  Holy  Ghost.  In  this 
manner  all  the  Fathers  of  the  same  Council  understood  the  passage. 
Therefore  in  the  Letters  of  Union  the  whole  Synod  declared,  " And 
since  all  things  which  the  Father  hath,  the  Father  Himself  has  given 
to  His  Only  Begotten  Son  except  to  be  the  Father,  this  very  thing  that 
the  Holy  Ghost  proceedeth  from  the  Son,  the  Son  Himself  hath 
eternally  from  the  Father,  of  Whom  also  He  is  eternally  begotten.” 
(See  Bellarm.  lib.  2,  de  Christo , c.  20  et  seq.) 

Moreover  one  Divine  Person  is  said  to  be  sent  by  another,  when 
by  the  will  of  Him  from  whom  He  proceeds  He  begins  to  be  any- 
where in  a fresh  manner  from  that  in  which  He  was  there  before. 
Thus  the  Son  was  sent  by  the  Father  in  the  flesh  that  He  might 
become  man.  The  Holy  Ghost  was  sent  by  the  Father  and  the  Son 
to  the  Apostles,  interiorly  by  the  abundant  grace  with  which  He 
illuminated  their  minds,  and  inflamed  their  will  that  they  should 
constantly  bear  witness  to  Christ  and  His  doctrine  : but  He  did  the 
same  exteriorly  by  means  of  the  fiery  tongues,  by  which  He  gave 
efficacy  to  their  words,  and  also  by  means  of  the  miracles  which  He 
wrought  by  them, 

I will  send from  the  Father . Christ  said  this — 1 st.  Plainly : as  it  were 
thus,  When  I shall  have  ascended  to  the  Father  in  heaven,  then  I 
with  the  Father  will  send  unto  you  the  Holy  Ghost.  2d.  Theophy- 
lact  says ,from  the  Father  means,  the  Father  approving  and  together 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  PROCESSION  FROM  THE  SON. 


147 


sending.  3d.  From  the  Father  may  mean  that  the  Son  hath  from 
the  Father  the  Divine  Essence,  and  consequently  the  power  of 
breathing  and  sending  the  Holy  Ghost,  so  that  verily  with  the 
Father,  by  the  same  action  and  breathing  He  breathes,  and  by  the 
same  Mission  sends,  the  Holy  Spirit  So  S.  Hilary  (lib.  de  Synod.) 
and  the  Council  of  Sirmium. 

4th.  From  the  Father , Le.  I will  send  you  the  Holy  Ghost, 
who  is  with  the  Father,  forasmuch  as  He  is  coetemal  and  consub- 
stantial  with  Him. 

5th.  The  words  from  the  Father  crush  the  heresy  of  Eunomius, 
who  taught  that  the  Holy  Ghost  proceeds  not  from  the  Father,  but 
from  the  Son,  so  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is,  as  it  were,  the  Son  of  the 
Son,  and  the  Grandchild  of  God  the  Father.  This  heresy  S.  Basil 
refutes  (lib.  2,  cotitr.  eund.),  showing  that  the  Holy  Ghost  proceeds 
from  the  Father  and  the  Son.  So  also  S.  Cyril  (lib.  10,  c.  33) 
teaches  that  the  Holy  Spirit  is  of  the  Father  and  the  Son,  and  pro- 
ceeded from  the  Father,  but  through  the  Son.  Which  means 
nothing  else  but  that  which  we  say,  that  the  Son  produces  the  Holy 
Spirit  from  the  Father,  i.e.  He  hath  from  the  Father  to  produce  the 
Holy  Ghost,  as  God  by  the  Word  created  all  things.  For  all  things 
were  made  by  Him. 

S.  Thomas  (1  par.  q.  36.  art.  2),  Suarez,  and  others  give  the  reason 
d priori.  Because  if  the  Holy  Ghost  did  not  proceed  from  the  Son, 
He  would  not  be  distinguished  from  the  Son.  For  in  the  Godhead 
there  is  no  distinction  save  in  the  procession  of  One  from  Another, 
and  the  distinction  of  relationship. 

Who  proceedeth  from  the  Father.  Thus  Christ  speaks,  and  19 
silent  concerning  Himself:  1st.  Because  the  Father  is  the  First 
Principle  of  the  Spiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  I have  said.  2d. 
Because  Christ,  for  the  sake  of  humility  and  reverence,  to  give  us  an 
example,  is  wont  to  refer  all  things  concerning  His  authority  to  the 
Father.  3d.  Because  if  He  had  said,  Who  proceedeth  from  Me,  He 
could  not  appositely  have  subjoined,  He  shall  testify  of  Me.  For 
the  witness  who  proceeds  from  any  one,  if  he  gives  testimony  con- 
cerning him  among  men,  is  apt  to  be  suspected. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


148 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XV. 


Moreover,  Jansen  says  that  these  words  are  to  be  understood,  not 
concerning  the  Divine  and  eternal  procession,  but  concerning  that 
temporal  and  human  procession  by  which  the  Holy  Ghost  is  sent 
to  the  Apostles  and  other  believers.  But  that  the  Divine  procession 
is  here  spoken  of  is  clear — 1st.  Because  such  is  the  evident 
meaning  of  the  words  when  He  saith,  Who  proceedeth  from  the 
Father.  For  when  Christ  speaks  of  temporal  missions,  something  is 
added  to  show  what  is  meant,  as  when  He  saith  {chap,  xvl),  I came 
forth  from  the  Father , and  am  come  into  the  world.  2d.  Because 
He  had  just  before  spoken  of  the  temporal  mission,  saying,  Whom 
I will  send  unto  you  from  the  Father.  3d.  Because  the  Fathers  in 
the  Council  of  Florence  so  understood  it  (sess.  18  and  23).  4th. 
Because  the  temporal  mission  or  procession  presupposes  the  eternal. 
For  as  I have  previously  said,  in  the  Godhead  One  Person  is  not 
said  to  be  be  sent  by  Another,  except  the  Person  who  proceeds  from 
Another. 

He  shall  testify  of  Me,  that  I am  the  Son  of  God,  the  Messias,  the 
Saviour  of  the  world.  And  this  He  shall  do  both  by  interior  illumin- 
ation and  inspiration,  and  by  external  miracles.  Now  in  a witness 
three  things  are  needful.  1st  Wisdom  that  he  should  know  the 
truth.  2d.  Honesty,  that  he  should  relate  it  sincerely,  and  neither 
deceive,  nor  be  deceived.  3d.  Power  and  authority,  that  he 
should  be  allowed  by  all  to  be  a true  witness,  and  above  all  sus- 
picion. These  three  qualifications  most  perfectly  unite  in  the  Holy 
Spirit  He  therefore  is  the  most  perfect  witness  of  Christ. 

And  ye  shall  bear  witness,  &c.  The  Greek  is  /uagru{«7r«,  which  is  both 
of  the  indicative  mood,  meaning  ye  bear  witness,  and  the  imperative, 
bear  ye  witness.  St  Cyril  reads  the  indicative,  as  does  the  Syriac 
version.  The  Vulgate,  ye  shall  bear  witness  has  the  same  meaning  as 
bear  witness  {imperative).  He  bids  them  testify  by  their  preaching 
that  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God.  For  the  future  is  often  put  for  the 
imperative. 

From  this  passage  learn  who,  what,  and  how  great  is  the  Holy 
Ghost  1 st.  That  He  is  the  Third  Person  in  the  Holy  Trinity,  distinct 
from  the  Father  and  the  Son,  For  in  that  He  proceedeth  from,  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BY  SBtRATlOtf. 


149 

is  sent  by  Both,  He  that  proceedeth  and  is  sent  is  distinct  from 
Those  who  send.  2d.  That  the  Holy  Ghost  is  true  God,  of  one 
substance  with  God  the  Father,  because  He  proceedeth  from  Him 
as  God  from  God.  3d.  That  He  proceedeth — not  from  the  Father 
alone,  not  from  the  Son  alone,  but — unitedly  from  Both  as  from  one 
Principle  of  Spiration.  4th.  That  He  proceedeth  not  from  the 
Father  by  Generation,  as  doth  the  Son,  but  by  Spiration,  so  that  He 
is  the  Holy  Spirit  Wherefore  SS.  Athanasius,  Basil,  Nazianzen, 
Chrysostom,  Augustine,  and  others  throughout  their  writings  refute 
the  heretic  Macedonius,  who  said,  that  since  the  Holy  Ghost  pro- 
ceedeth not  from  the  Father  by  the  way  of  Generation,  as  the  Son 
doth,  He  is  therefore  not  Consubstantial  with  the  Father,  neither  is 
He  God.  5th.  That  He  is  the  Paraclete,  t.e.  the  Comforter  and  the 
Exhorter  to  all  goodness.  6th.  That  He  is  the  very  Spirit  of  Truth, 
because  He  teaches  all  truth,  and  the  true  faith,  doctrine,  and 
prudence.  7th.  That  He  is  the  witness  of  Christ  and  of  His  doctrine ; 
the  witness,  I say,  infinitely  above  all  other  witnesses,  because  He 
is  Himself  very  God. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


( ijo  ) 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

I  Christ  foretells  the  persecution  which  would  come  on  the  Apostles , and  promises 
them  the  Holy  Spirit ',  to  convince  the  world  of  sin , of  righteousness , and  of 
judgment , and  to  glorify  Him.  1 6 Explains  the  words , A little  while  and  ye 
shall  not  see  me.  23  The  meaning  of  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  the  Father  in 
My  name,  He  will  give  it  you,  and  in  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation%  but 
be  of  good  cheer,  I have  overcome  the  world. 

THESE  things  have  I spoken  unto  you,  that  ye  should  not  be  offended. 

2  They  shall  put  you  out  of  the  synagogues ; yea,  the  time  cometh,  that 
whosoever  killeth  you  will  think  that  he  doeth  God  service. 

3  And  these  things  will  they  do  unto  you,  because  they  have  not  known  the 
Father,  nor  me. 

4  But  these  things  have  I told  you,  that  when  the  time  shall  come,  ye  may 
remember  that  I told  you  of  them.  And  these  things  I said  not  unto  you  at  the 
beginning,  because  I was  with  you. 

5  But  now  I go  my  way  to  him  that  sent  me ; and  none  of  you  asketh  me, 
Whither  goest  thou  ? 

6  But  because  I have  said  these  things  unto  you,  sorrow  hath  filled  your  heart. 

7  Nevertheless  I tell  you  the  truth  ; It  is  expedient  for  you  that  I go  away : 
for  if  I go  not  away  the  Comforter  will  not  come  unto  you  ; but  if  I depart,  I 
will  send  him  unto  you. 

8  And  when  he  is  come,  he  will  reprove  the  world  of  sin,  and  of  righteousness, 
and  of  judgment : 

9  Of  sin,  because  they  believe  not  on  me  5 

10  Of  righteousness,  because  I go  to  my  Father,  and  ye  see  me  no  more ; 

1 1  Of  judgment,  because  the  prince  of  this  world  is  judged. 

12  I have  yet  many  things  to  say  unto  you,  but  ye  cannot  bear  them  now. 

13  Howbeit  when  he,  the  Spirit  of  truth,  is  come,  he  will  guide  you  into  all 
truth  : for  he  shall  not  speak  of  himself ; but  whatsoever  he  shall  hear,  that  shall 
he  speak  : and  he  will  show  you  things  to  come. 

14  He  shall  glorify  me  : for  he  shall  receive  of  mine,  and  shall  show  it  unto 
you. 

15  All  things  that  the  Father  hath  are  mine  : therefore  said  I,  that  he  shall 
take  of  mine,  and  shall  shew  it  unto  you. 

16  A little  while,  and  ye  shall  not  see  me  : and  again,  a little  while,  and  ye 
shall  see  me,  because  I go  to  the  Father. 

17  Then  said  some  of  his  disciples  among  themselves,  What  is  this  that  he 
saith  unto  us,  A little  while,  and  ye  shall  not  see  me  : and  again,  a little  while, 
and  ye  shall  see  me  t and,  Because  I go  to  the  Father  ? 


Digitized  by  v^ooQLe 


CHRIST  FORETELLS  PERSECUTION  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  I Si 


1 8 They  said  therefore,  What  is  this  that  he  saith,  A little  while  ? we  cannot 
tell  what  he  saith. 

19  Now  Jesus  knew  that  they  were  desirous  to  ask  him,  and  said  unto  them, 
Do  ye  inquire  among  yourselves  of  that  I said,  A little  while,  and  ye  shall  not  see 
me  : and  again,  a little  while,  and  ye  shall  see  me  ? 

20  Verily,  verily,  I say  unto  you,  That  ye  shall  weep  and  lament,  but  the 
world  shall  rejoice  : and  ye  shall  be  sorrowful,  but  your  sorrow  shall  be  turned 
into  joy. 

21  A woman  when  she  is  in  travail  hath  sorrow,  because  her  hour  is  come : 
but  as  soon  as  she  is  delivered  of  the  child,  she  remembereth  no  more  the  anguish, 
for  joy  that  a man  is  bom  into  the  world. 

22  And  ye  now  therefore  have  sorrow  : but  I will  see  you  again,  and  your 
heart  shall  rejoice,  and  your  joy  no  man  taketh  from  you. 

23  And  in  that  day  ye  shall  ask  me  nothing.  Verily,  verily,  I say  unto  you, 
Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  the  Father  in  my  name,  he  will  give  it  you. 

24  Hitherto  have  ye  asked  nothing  in  my  name  : ask,  and  ye  shall  receive, 
that  your  joy  may  be  full. 

25  These  things  have  I spoken  unto  you  in  proverbs : but  the  time  cometh, 
when  I shall  no  more  speak  unto  you  in  proverbs,  but  I shall  shew  you  plainly  of 
the  Father. 

26  At  that  day  ye  shall  ask  in  my  name  : and  I say  not  unto  you,  that  I will 
pray  the  Father  for  you  : 

27  For  the  Father  himself  loveth  you,  because  ye  have  loved  me,  and  have 
believed  that  I came  out  from  God. 

28  I came  forth  from  the  Father,  and  am  come  into  the  world  : again,  I leave 
the  world,  and  go  to  the  Father. 

29  His  disciples  said  unto  him,  Lo,  now  speakest  thou  plainly,  and  speakest 
no  proverb. 

30  Now  are  we  sure  that  thou  knowest  all  things,  and  needest  not  that  any 
man  should  ask  thee  : by  this  we  believe  that  thou  earnest  forth  from  God. 

31  Jesus  answered  them,  Do  ye  now  believe  ? 

32  Behold,  the  hour  cometh,  yea,  is  now  come,  that  ye  shall  be  scattered,  every 
man  to  his  own,  and  shall  leave  me  alone  : and  yet  I am  not  alone,  because  the 
Father  is  with  me. 

33  These  things  I have  spoken  unto  you,  that  in  me  ye  might  have  peace.  In 
the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation  ; but  be  of  good  cheer  ; I have  overcome  the 
world. 

Ver.  i. — These  things  have  I spoken  unto  you,  that  ye  should  not  be 
offended.  (1.)  Some  think  that  this  refers  to  Matt,  xxvi.  31,  All  ye 
shall  be  offended  because  of  Me  this  night.  And  that  the  meaning  is,  I 
have  foretold  you,  that  ye  would  flee  away,  when  ye  shall  see  Me 
taken : and  I did  so,  in  order  that  your  shock  and  trouble  of  mind 
might  be  less,  when  it  came  to  pass ; and  that  thus  ye  might  regain 
your  courage  and  come  back  to  Me.  (2.)  S.  Cyril  (x.  34), 
Maldonatus,  and  others,  refer  these  words  to  the  persecutions  which 


Digitized  by 


i$2 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XVt. 


Christ  just  before  said  were  impending  on  the  Apostles.  And  He 
did  so  that  they  might  strengthen  themselves  against  them.  For 
evils  which  come  unexpectedly,  greatly  stagger  even  brave  men, 
while  those  which  are  foreseen  take  less  effect.  (3.)  Bede, 
Euthymius,  and  others  refer  the  words  to  the  Holy  Spirit  Who  had 
just  been  spoken  of,  thus  explaining  them,  I have  spoken  these 
things  of  the  Holy  Spirit  Who  will  come  to  you,  in  order  that  ye  may 
not  be  offended  when  ye  see  yourselves  assailed  by  persecutions, 
but  may  boldly  withstand  them  with  the  thought  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  will  render  you  His  aid.  S.  Augustine  says  {in  loc.)  much  the 
same: — “Having  promised  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  whose  operation 
they  would  become  His  witnesses,  He  rightly  added,  These  things 
have  I spoken  unto  you  ; for  when  the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad 
in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Spirit  which  is  given  us,  great  peace  is 
theirs  who  love  the  Law  of  God  (Ps.  cxix.  165),  so  that  they  are 
not  offended.”  (4.)  Toletus,  Ribera,  and  others,  by  the  last  two 
explanations,  give  the  best  meaning  : — “ I have  said  all  these  things 
about  persecution  and  the  hatred  of  the  world,  and  also  of  the 
coming  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  strengthen  you,  that  ye  may  not  stumble 
in  the  way  of  eternal  life  in  which  ye  are  walking,  and  fall  away  from 
Me,  as  though  I did  not  foresee,  or  were  unwilling  to  warn  you,  or 
as  if  your  sufferings  were  intolerable,  and  had  befallen  you  unex- 
pectedly. He  removes  therefore  from  the  Apostles  a stumbling-block, 
and  ground  of  offence,  both  by  forewarning  them  of  the  danger,  and 
by  promising  the  aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  withstand  it.”  The 
Syriac  and  the  Arabic  connect  this  verse  with  what  follows  by  the 
word  “for,”  meaning  thereby  that  persecutions  would  be  aground 
of  offence. 

Ver.  2. — They  shall  put  you  out  of  the  synagogue. — The  assembly  of 
the  Jews  was  called  a synagogue,  as  was  also  the  place  of  the 
assembly.  For  God  had  ordained  that  there  should  be  only  one 
Temple  in  Judea,  where  sacrifices  were  to  be  offered.  And  this 
could  not  contain  all  the  Jews,  nor  could  they  all  attend  it  weekly. 
Accordingly  the  Jews  had  one  or  more  Synagogues  in  every  city  (in 
Jerusalem  at  the  time  of  its  destruction  there  were  480)  which  the 


►igitized  by 


THE  EARLY  PERSECUTIONS. 


153 

people  frequented  weekly,  only  to  pray,  and  to  hear  the  Law 
expounded  by  the  scribes.  They  seem  to  have  been  set  up  in  the 
time  of  the  Judges.  To  be  put  out  of  the  synagogue  was  accord- 
ingly the  same  as  being  excommunicated  (see  ch.  ix.)  But  Christ 
here  promised  His  Church  to  the  Apostles,  when  the  Jews  excom- 
municated them. 

But  the  time  cometh , that  whoso  killeth  you  will  think  that  he  doeth 
God  service,  Maldonatus  takes  “but”  to  mean  “because”  from 
the  Hebrew  word  ki  being  so  translated  by  the  LXX.  Service, , the 
service  that  is,  which  is  due  to  God  alone.  Both  Jews  and  Gentiles 
will  offer  you  up  as  a sacrifice  to  God,  counting  you  the  offscouring 
of  all  things  (i  Cor.  iv.  13).  Moreover,  S.  Augustine  (in  loc.)  thinks 
that  this  was  said  to  console  the  Apostles.  The  Jews  will  cast  you 
out,  but  I will  gather  you,  and  ye  will  convert  so  vast  a multitude 
of  men  to  Me,  that  the  Jews,  fearing  the  desertion  of  the  Temple 
and  the  Law,  would  kill  you,  considering  that  they  would  thus 
greatly  honour  God,  by  killing  you  in  their  defence.  The 
martyrs  of  Lyons  considered  that  this  was  fulfilled  in  their  case  (see 
Euseb.  v.  i),  quoting  this  very  text 

Christ  here  foretells  the  persecutions  of  the  Roman  Emperors  for 
three  hundred  years,  in  which  more  than  200,000  Christians  were 
martyred.  They  were  led  to  this  by  various  motives.  As  though 
fearing  the  destruction  of  their  empire  which  rested  in  their  heredi- 
tary religion.  As  regarding  with  abhorrence  the  worship  of  a 
crucified  man  which  the  Apostles  taught  As  seeing  their  own 
vices  and  impurities  uprooted  by  the  Apostles.  As  persuaded  by 
their  priests  that  the  Christian  religion  was  the  cause  of  all  public 
calamities. 

Ver.  3. — And  these  things  will  they  do  unto  you,  because  they  have 
not  known  the  Father  nor  Me,  He  says  this  not  to  excuse  the 
persecutors,  but  rather  to  comfort  the  Apostles.  “ The  reason  why 
Jews  and  Gentiles  will  persecute  you,  He  would  say,  is  because  they 
refuse  to  acknowledge  Me  as  the  Son  of  God  the  Father,  though 
established  by  countless  miracles.  And  therefore  their  ignorance 
only  aggravates  their  guilt  But  it  will  be  a consolation  to  you  in 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


*54 


S.  JOHN,  c.  XVI. 


your  persecutions,  that  ye  know  Me  and  My  Father,  and  are  suffer- 
ing for  both  Our  sakes.  For  if  it  is  glorious  to  die  for  one’s  country, 
it  is  much  more  glorious  to  die  for  God.”  So  S.  Augustine.  S.  Chry- 
sostom adds  this,  “If  a prince  or  his  ambassador  enters  a city, 
unattended  and  consequently  not  known,  and  is  treated  with 
indignity,  he  cares  little  for  it,  for  when  his  retinue  arrives,  he  will 
make  himself  knowm,  and  put  to  shame  those  who  derided  him.” 

Ver.  4. — But  these  things  have  I told  you,  that  when  the  hour  shall 
come,  ye  may  remember  that  / told  you  of  them.  (1.)  S.  Cyril  (x.  13). 
supplies  the  connection  thus.  I have  not  said  these  things  to 
enervate  you,  but  that,  remembering  I told  you  them  before,  your 
faith  may  be  more  firm  and  established  in  the  time  of  peril.  (2.) 
Rupertus,  without  supplying  anything,  explains  the  words  more 
closely: — “I  tell  you  these  things  now  in  order  that  ye  may  remember 
what  I promised,  that  in  all  your  sufferings  not  a hair  of  your  head 
shall  perish,  and  that  though  your  enemies  kill  your  bodies,  ye  shall  in 
patience  possess  your  souls.”  The  latter  part  is  not  applicable,  for, 
Christ  reminds  them  only  of  what  He  had  just  said.  (4.)  Ribera 
and  Maldonatus  give  the  genuine  meaning; — “Ye  shall  suffer  these 
things,  but  I give  you  this  remedy  against  them ; that  you  should 
remember  Me,  that  as  being  God,  they  could  not  escape  my  notice, 
and  that  I could  have  prevented  them,  had  I so  willed.  And  that 
you  should  therefore  rely  on  Me  as  God,  believing  that  I will  be 
with  you,  and  so  strengthen  you  that  ye  may  be  able  to  overcome 
all  adversities,  and  that  I may  crown  you  afterwards  with  the 
martyr’s  chaplet.” 

S.  Augustine,  Bede,  and  Rupert  read  “ the  hour  for  these  things.” 
S.  Chrysostom,  Theophylact,  and  Euthymius  much  more  correctly, 
“ remember  them.” 

Yer.  5. — But  these  things  I said  not  unto  you  at  the  beginning, 
because  I was  with  you . Christ  here  answers  an  implied  objection 
of  the  Apostles,  Why  did  you  not  tell  us  this  at  the  first,  that  we 
might  see  whether  it  were  expedient  or  not  for  us  to  follow  Thee  ? 
He  answers,  that  He  did  it  purposely,  both  because  they  could  not 
as  yet  understand  these  things,  and  also  because  He  was  with  them 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


Christ's  forewarnings. 


155 


to  guide  and  protect  them.  But  that  now,  when  He  was  about  to 
leave  them  to  themselves,  He  would  still  strengthen  them  by  His 
grace,  and  enlighten  them  by  the  Holy  Spirit  Whom  He  would  send 
them. 

But  what  were  those  things  which  He  then  first  told  the  Apostles  ? 
(1.)  S.  Augustine  (in  loc .)  understands  the  whole  passage  to  refer 
only  to  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Ghost  as  the  other  Comforter,  when 
He  was  gone.  For  His  words  refer  not  only  to  the  coming  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  but  also  to  the  persecutions  He  had  foretold.  (2.) 
The  Gloss  applies  it  to  all  Christ’s  words  of  consolation  which  (said 
He)  I did  not  speak  before,  because  I was  Myself  present  to  comfort 
you.  This  is  too  vague  an  explanation.  (3.)  Jansen  and  Maldo- 
natus  think  that  S.  Matt.  (ch.  x.)  spoke  by  anticipation.  For  (1.) 
The  Apostles,  when  first  sent  forth,  did  not  suffer  any  persecution. 
(2.)  It  could  not  refer  to  Gentile  persecutions,  for  they  were 
forbidden  to  go  to  them.  (3.)  S.  Mark  and  S.  Luke  state  that  they 
were  spoken  at  another  time,  and  in  diverse  places  from  whence  it  is 
inferred  that  they  were  spoken  after  the  Resurrection,  but  inserted, 
as  they  were  by  S.  Matthew,  from  their  close  connection  with  the 
subject  in  hand. 

Ribera  and  Toletus  expound  this  view  at  great  length,  but  their 
arguments  are  not  convincing.  It  may  be  explained  most  simply 
by  saying,  that  though  Christ  had  said  something  about  persecu- 
tions, yet  He  did  not  speak  of  them  particularly  nor  describe  their 
severity  and  atrocity ; for  instance,  He  did  not  foretell  their  being 
cast  out  of  the  synagogues,  as  He  does  here  ; nor  yet  the  martyrdom 
they  would  all  of  them  suffer ; nor  yet  that  their  murderers  would 
be  supposed  to  do  God  service;  nor  again  that  these  persecu- 
tions would  soon  come  upon  them.  S.  Chrysostom,  Theophylact, 
Euthymius,  Toletus,  Ribera,  and  others,  add  to  this  (from  S. 
Augustine)  that  He  did  not  mention  the  promised  aid  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  as  He  does  here. 

Because  I was  with  you . And  bore  in  My  own  Person  all  the 
hatred  and  revilings  of  the  Jews.  But  now,  when  I am  gone,  they 
will  assail  you  on  My  account.  I therefore  forewarn  you,  that  ye 


Digitized  by 


Google 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XVI. 


156 

may  be  forearmed,  and  I will  also  send  My  Holy  Spirit  to  protect 
and  arm  you  on  every  side. 

Morally . Hence  learn  that  God  does  not  in  the  beginning  reveal 
the  difficulties,  temptations,  and  trials  of  those  whom  He  calls,  lest 
they  should  shrink  back.  But  when  they  are  confirmed  and 
strengthened  in  their  calling,  He  sends  them  upon  them,  or  permits 
them  to  be  sent,  by  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil,  in  order 
to  train  them  as  His  soldiers  for  the  battle,  that  thus  they  may  learn 
to  conquer,  and  that  He  may  crown  them  as  conquerors.  As  it 
was  said  (Ex.  xiii.  17)  to  the  Hebrews,  on  going  out  of  Egypt. 
For  this  reason  He  preserves  novices  in  religion  from  temptation, 
and  soothes  them  with  spiritual  consolation,  as  a mother  gives  suck 
to  her  infant. 

But  now  1 go  My  way  to  Him  that  sent  Me.  By  My  Cross  and 
Death  I am  going  to  My  Resurrection  and  to  My  glorious  Ascen- 
sion, and  return  to  My  Father. 

And  none  of  you  asketh  Me,  Whither  goest  Thou  f For  though 
Thomas  asked  Him  that  very  question,  yet  neither  he  nor  anyone 
understood  the  answer  of  Christ,  which  was  sufficiently  obscure, 
nor  did  any  one  ask  Christ  to  explain  its  meaning  more  fully,  so 
absorbed  were  they  all  by  their  sorrow  at  His  coming  departure. 
So  S.  Cyril,  Euthymius,  Maldonatus,  Jansen,  and  others. 

Christ  therefore  quietly  reproves  the  Apostles  for  not  asking  Him 
more  on  the  subject,  as,  e.g.,  Where  He  was  going;  to  what  joys, 
glory,  and  kingdom ; what  aid  He  would  send  them  from  thence ; 
what  rewards  He  would  give.  For  this  knowledge  would  assuredly 
have  lessened  their  sorrow,  if  it  did  not  entirely  remove  it. 

Ver.  6. — But  because  I have  said  these  things  to  you,  sorrow  hath 
filled  your  heart. — Maldonatus  explains  M but  ” by  “ for,”  i.e.  This 
(your  sorrow)  is  the  reason  why  ye  ask  Me  not.  But  Toletus 
explains  it  by  “ Nay,  rather,”  meaning  “ Ye  not  only  do  not  ask  Me, 
but  more  than  this,  ye  are  overwhelmed  with  sorrow.”  But  it  is 
simpler  to  understand  as  conveying  a tacit  reproof  for  being  so 
given  up  to  sorrow,  as  to  have  no  courage  to  ask  Him  that  which 
would  have  alleviated  their  sorrow,  and  would  have  been  to  them 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


CHRIST’S  GOING  AWAY  EXPEDIENT. 


157 


the  greatest  consolation  and  joy:  namely,  that  He  was  going  to 
the  Father,  and  would  send  His  Holy  Spirit  to  prepare  a place  for 
them  in  heaven. 

Ver.  7. — Nevertheless  1 tell  you  the  truths  it  is  expedient  for  you 
that  I go  away.  (1.)  S.  Chrysostom  (Horn,  lxxvii.)  explains  it  thus, 
“ I say  not  this  to  please  you,  but  though  you  will  be  made  more 
sorrowful,  you  must  hear  what  is  expedient  Ye  indeed  would 
wish  Me  to  be  near,  but  utility  demands  the  contrary.  But  it  is  the 
duty  of  one  who  loves,  when  he  learns  the  utility,  not  to  allow  his 
beloved  ones  to  be  deprived  of  it.”  And  S.  Cyril  (x.  39)  almost 
in  the  same  words,  “I  perceive  that  ye  are  affected  with  great 
sorrow,  because  I have  resolved  to  go  away.  And  that  too,  not 
unreasonably,  especially  when  ye  hear  that  great  tribulations  will 
befall  you.  But  since  utility  is  to  be  preferred  to  what  is  pleasant, 
I will  make  known  to  you  the  truth.” 

Christ  does  not  here  oppose  “ truth”  to  grace,  but  to  sorrow, 
and  makes  truth  refer  to  the  consolation  of  the  Apostles.  For  He 
says  this  to  take  away  their  sorrow  by  the  joyful  message  of  conso- 
lation. Ye  are  sorrowful  (He  would  say)  at  My  departure,  as  if  it 
were  your  greatest  loss.  But  be  assured,  both  that  ye  have  sorrow, 
and  that  it  is  in  truth  expedient  for  you  that  I go  away.  For  My 
departure  to  the  Father  will  be  to  you  of  the  greatest  benefit  For 
I will  send  from  thence  the  Holy  Spirit  on  you,  Who  will  fill  you 
with  all  virtue  and  strength.  And  therefore  My  departure  will  not 
only  be  to  your  highest  profit,  but  even  to  your  pleasure,  as  you 
will  experience  at  Pentecost  Whence  He  adds,  For  if  I go  not 
away , the  Comforter  (your  consoler  and  encourager)  will  not  come 
unto  you;  but  if  I depart  I will  send  Him  unto  you  (see  above  and 
chap.  viL  39).  For  the  disciples,  as  children  with  their  mother,  and 
chickens  with  the  hen,  being  too  much  accustomed  to  converse  with 
Christ  as  a man,  and  to  His  corporeal  presence,  could  not  under- 
stand the  Holy  Spirit  and  His  spiritual  gifts.  And  Christ  accord- 
ingly withdrew  from  them,  that  being  weaned  from  Him,  and  their 
minds  wholly  fixed  on  the  Holy  Spirit,  they  might  be  raised  by  Him 
to  heroic  deeds,  by  which  they  would  convert  the  whole  world. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


*58 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XVI. 


And  accordingly  the  Holy  Spirit  coming  on  them  at  Pentecost, 
made  them  masters  instead  of  disciples,  and  created  them  teachers 
of  the  whole  world.  (See  S.  Augustine,  in  loc .,  and  S.  Gregory, 
Moral,  viii.  33.)  The  Holy  Spirit  is  here  appositely  called  the 
Paraclete,  to  signify  that  He  would  amply  console  the  disciples,  who 
were  sad  at  Christ's  departure,  and  would  fill  them  with  every  joy. 
Hence  S.  Chrysostom  (Horn,  lxxvii.)  proves  against  Macedonius  that 
the  Holy  Spirit  is  truly  God;  for  were  He  not  the  Creator,  but 
merely  a creature,  how  would  it  be  expedient  that  Christ,  on  account 
of  His  coming,  should  leave  the  disciples,  being  their  Creator  and 
God  ? Again,  lest  it  should  be  thought  that  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the 
same  with  the  Son,  Christ  adds,  “ I will  send  Him  unto  you,”  for 
the  Sender  is  really  and  personally  distinguished  from  the  Sent. 
And  it  is  signified  also  that  the  Holy  Spirit  proceeds  alike  from  the 
Father  and  the  Son.  For  in  the  Holy  Trinity  whatever  Person 
sends  another  Person  produces  It,  that  is,  begets  or  breathes  it,  as 
the  Father  sending  the  Son,  begets  Him  also,  and  He  likewise 
together  with  the  Son,  by  sending  the  Holy  Spirit,  also  breathes 
Him  forth. 

Ver  8. — And  when  He  is  come , He  will  reprove  the  world  of  sin, 
and  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment  By  the  world  He  means  both 
Jews  and  Gentiles  who  believe  not  in  Christ.  These  the  Holy 
Spirit  will  reprove,  i.e.  will  reproach,  blame,  and  refute  them,  will 
so  convince  by  arguments  as  to  make  it  plain  that  they  are  con- 
vinced— though  obstinate,  continuing  in  their  unbelief,  they  will  be 
loth  to  admit  it — and  will  refuse  to  believe  in  Christ,  as  heretics  who 
are  pertinacious  in  their  error. 

Ver.  9. — Of  sin , because  they  believed  (believe,  Greek  and  Syriac 
version)  not  in  Me \ He  will  convict  My  enemies,  both  Jewish  and 
Gentile  unbelievers,  both  of  the  great  sin  of  unbelief  (S.  Chrysostom 
and  Augustine),  and  of  every  other  sin  (S.  Cyril),  for  refusing  to 
believe  in  Me,  after  the  many  reasons  they  have  heard,  and  the 
miracles  they  have  seen.  For  the  Spirit  will  bring  home  to  them 
the  state  of  their  soul,  both  outwardly,  by  earnest  preaching,  by 
the  sanctity  of  the  Apostles,  and  the  miracles  He  will  work  through 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  HOLY  GHOST  REBUKES  THE  WORLD. 


159 


them  ; and  inwardly,  by  enlightening  their  minds  by  His  Inspiration, 
so  that  they  will  acknowledge,  even  against  their  will,  that  they  are 
in  their  former  infidelity  and  other  sins,  and  that  they  cannot  be 
liberated  from  them,  except  by  faith  in  Me,  which  they  refused  to 
accept.  For  He  will  demonstrate  to  them  that  there  is  no  other 
Saviour  who  can  atone  for  sin,  but  Myself.  See  Acts  iv.  12.  And 
consequently,  though  many  were  moved  by  this  preaching  of  the 
Apostles,  yet  others,  by  persisting  in  their  unbelief,  became  inexcus- 
able, and  worthy  of  damnation  and  hell.  See  Acts  ii.  37.  So 
S.  Cyril,  Leontius,  and  others. 

Ver.  10. — Of  righteousness . The  Holy  Spirit  will  prove  that  the 
righteousness  of  the  world  is  false ; that  of  the  J ews,  because  they 
sought  it  by  the  ceremonies  of  the  Law,  which  could  not  purify  the 
soul ; and  that  of  the  Gentiles,  because  they  sought  it  only  in  things 
which  were  naturally  and  morally  honest,  and  despised  Christ  But 
He,  the  Holy  Ghost,  will  set  forth  Christ,  who  was  despised  and 
counted  unrighteous,  to  be  alone  Righteous,  and  the  source  and 
origin  of  all  righteousness.  So  S.  Cyril,  lib.  vi. 

Tropologically,  S.  Bemardine  (Serm.  xxl ) says,  “ The  Holy  Spirit 
reproves  the  world  of  sin,  because  it  dissembles  ; of  righteousness, 
which  it  does  not  order  rightly,  while  it  gives  it  to  itself  and  not  to 
God;  of  judgment,  which  it  usurps,  in  rashly  judging  both  of  itself 
and  others.” 

Because  I go  to  My  Father.  It  is  an  offence  to  the  world,  and 
worldlings,  that,  seeming  to  be  a mere  man,  I preach  new  and  para- 
doxical doctrines.  But  the  contrary  will  soon  be  made  manifest  to 
them,  viz.,  that  I have  been  sent  by  God  the  Father  to  reconcile  the 
world  to  God  by  My  death  on  the  Cross,  and  to  raise  them  to  the 
rights  of  His  children.  For,  ascending  unto  heaven  I shall  return 
to  Him,  so  that  the  world  will  see  Me  no  more,  nor  be  scandalised 
by  the  sight  of  My  infirmity  in  the  flesh.  And  I will  from  thence 
send  the  Holy  Spirit  to  justify  and  sanctify  those  who  believe  in  Me, 
and  from  this  it  will  be  clear  to  the  whole  world  that  I am  not  a 
mere  man,  but  the  God-man,  the  Justifier  and  Sanctifier  of  the 
world  So  Leontius,  S.  Chrysostom,  Theophylact,  and  Euthymius. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


i6o 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XVI. 


S.  Chrysostom  adds  that  the  Holy  Spirit  distributed  His  gifts  and 
graces  to  the  faithful  at  the  invocation  of  the  Name  of  Jesus. 

And  ye  will  see  Me  no  more . He  speaks  not  of  them  personally, 
but  of  men  in  general  Ye  will  see  Me  ascending  to  My  Father, 
but  afterwards  ye  will  see  Me  no  more  in  this  life.  So  Maldonatus, 
Ribera,  and  others. 

Toletus  adds  that  Christ  said  this,  to  signify  that  there  was  no 
need  for  Him  to  come  again  into  the  world,  to  suffer  and  to  die. 
For  by  My  death  once  for  all  I have  fulfilled  all  righteousness  for  all 
men,  past,  present,  and  to  come.  Ye  will  therefore  see  Me  no  more 
as  ye  have  hitherto  seen  Me.  Having  then  completed  all  righteous- 
ness, the  world  must  after  My  departure  be  at  once  convicted  of 
righteousness,  that  is  to  say,  that  it  has  been  completed  and  con- 
summated by  Me.  S.  Augustine  (in  loc.)  adds,  “The  world  is 
reproved  of  sin,  because  it  believes  not  in  Christ.  It  is  reproved 
too  concerning  the  righteousness  of  those  who  believe  ; for  to  com- 
pare the  faithful  with  unbelievers  is  to  blame  the  unbelieving. 
But  because  it  is  the  common  cry  of  unbelievers,  ‘ How  can  we 
believe  that  which  we  do  not?*  He  therefore  defined  the  righteous- 
ness of  those  who  believe,  in  these  words,  * Because  I go  to  My 
Father,  and  ye  shall  see  Me  no  more.  Blessed  are  they  who  do  not 
see  and  yet  believe/  This  then  will  be  your  righteousness,  of  which 
the  world  is  reproved,  that  ye  believe  in  Me,  whom  ye  will  not  see.” 
He  says  also  (de  Verb.  Dom.  Serra.  lxi),  “ They  believed  not,  but 
He  goes  to  the  Father.  It  was  their  sin,  but  His  righteousness. 
For  His  coming  to  us  was  an  act  of  mercy,  His  going  to  the  Father 
was  His  righteousness,”  as  the  apostle  said,  “ Wherefore  God  hath 
also  highly  exalted  Him.”  And  also  ( Quces . N.  et  V Test  xxxix.), 
“ By  His  returning  He  proved  that  He  had  come  from  thence.” 
And  S.  Chrysostom,  “ His  going  to  the  Father  was  a proof  that  He 
had  lived  a blameless  life,  so  that  they  could  not  say,  He  is  a sinner, 
and  is  not  from  God.” 

Ver.  n. — Of  judgment , because  the  prince  of  this  world  is  judged. 
(i.)  S.  Chrysostom  and  Euthymius  explain  it  thus,  “The  Holy 
Spirit  will  prove  that  the  judgment  of  the  world  is  false  in  saying 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SATAN'S  KINGDOM  OVERTHROWN. 


161 


that  I work  miracles  by  the  power  and  craft  of  the  devil ; for  He 
will  prove  that  the  devil  has  been  condemned,  cast  out,  and  judged 
by  Me.  2d,  He  will  convict  the  world  of  sloth  in  being  unwilling  to 
trample  Satan  under  foot,  when  wounded  and  deprived  of  strength 
by  Christ.  3d,  He  will  reprove  the  world  of  being  led  astray,  by 
placing  its  hope  in  the  devil  who  has  been  condemned  by  Me,  or 
for  forsaking  God,  and  worshipping  the  devil  in  idols  or  in  creatures. 
4th,  Toletus  and  others  explain  thus : The  Holy  Spirit  will  mani- 
fest Me  to  the  world  as  the  just  Judge  of  quick  and  dead,  when  He 
will  make  it  seen  that  the  devil  is  condemned  by  Me.  For  if  I 
judge  and  condemn  devils,  much  more  do  I condemn  men.  5th, 
and  most  aptly,  He  will  make  the  world  see  its  own  condemnation, 
when  it  beholds  itself  condemned  in  the  person  of  its  head  ; when 
He  will  enable  the  Apostles,  by  invoking  the  Name  of  Jesus,  to  cast 
him  forth  from  the  temples  and  idols  in  which  the  world  worshipped 
him,  and  also  from  the  souls  and  bodies  of  men,  thus  over- 
throwing his  kingdom.  For  if  God  spared  not  the  angels  who  sinned, 
neither  wall  He  spare  the  guilty  world  ; if  He  spared  not  the  head, 
so  also  will  He  spare  not  his  members  and  subjects.  So  S.  Augus- 
tine, Bede,  Rupertus,  Maldonatus,  Ribera,  and  others. 

Justin  Martyr  uses  this  same  argument  (Dial,  cum  Tryphone),  also 
Tertullian  (ad  Serpulara  and  Apolog.  cap.  xxxvi.),  S.  Cyprian  (ad 
Demetrius),  Origen  (lib.  i.  contr.  Celsum),  S.  Athanasius  (de  Incar. 
Verbi),  Lactantius  (ii.  6),  and  others. 

Hear  S.  Augustine  (de  Verb.  Dom.  Serm.  lx.) : “ By  his  very  casting 
out  he  was  judged,  and  the  world  is  convicted  by  this  judgment, 
because  he  who  refuses  to  believe  in  Christ,  in  vain  complains 
about  the  devil:  For  since  he  has  been  cast  out  and  sentenced, 
though  he  is  permitted  to  assail  us  from  without,  yet  not  only  men 
but  even  women  and  boys  have  triumphed  over  him,  as  martyrs.” 
Also  the  same  father  (in  loc.\  “ He  is  judged,  that  is  irrevocably 
doomed  to  the  judgment  of  eternal  fire,  and  by  this  judgment  is 
the  world  reproved,  because  it  is  judged  with  its  prince,  whom  it 
imitates  in  his  pride  and  impiety.  Let  men  therefore  believe  in 
Christ,  lest  they  be  convicted  of  the  sin  of  unbelief,  which  binds 

VOL.  v.  L 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


162 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XVI. 


fast  all  sins ; let  them  pass  over  into  the  ranks  of  the  faithful,  lest 
they  be  reproved  by  the  righteousness  of  those,  whom  they  do 
not  imitate  in  being  justified ; let  them  beware  of  the  future  judg- 
ment, lest  they  be  condemned  with  the  prince  of  this  world  whom 
they  do  imitate.” 

Ver.  12. — I have  yet  many  things  to  say  unto  you  (of  the  mysteries 
of  the  faith,  of  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles,  of  the  foundation  and 
government  of  the  Church,  of  the  institution  of  priests  and  bishops, 
and  the  whole  ecclesiastical  hierarchy),  but  ye  cannot  bear  them  now . 
Your  mind  cannot  take  in  such  weighty  matters,  both  because  it  is 
weak  and  ill-informed,  and  so  accustomed  to  the  carnal  ordinances 
of  the  Jews,  as  to  be  unable  to  conceive  such  lofty  and  spiritual 
subjects ; and  also  because  it  is  entirely  occupied  with  sorrow, 
which  keeps  it  from  rising  to  the  apprehension  of  so  many  and  such 
noble  subjects.  But  I will  send  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  will  by  His 
enlightenment  make  you  capable  of  hearing  and  comprehending 
them.  So  S.  Chrysostom,  Cyril,  Theophylact,  and  S.  Augustine. 
Christ  encourages  His  Apostles  to  lift  up  their  hearts,  and  cherish 
the  desire  of  apprehending  these  great  mysteries  by  the  coming  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  We  may  thence  infer  that  the  Apostles  and  the 
Church  advanced  only  by  degrees  in  the  knowledge  of  the  mysteries 
of  the  faith,  as  the  light  of  the  sun  gradually  increases  from  dawn  to 
mid-day.  (See  Cant  vi.  9.)  And  every  believer  gradually  grows  in 
faith  and  holiness,  as  is  said  Prov.  iv.  18. 

Ver.  13. — Howbeitwhen  He,  the  Spirit  of  truth  (see  above  xiv.  17), 
shall  come , He  will  teach  you  all  truth, , which  it  is  fitting  you  should 
know  in  this  life,  both  for  guiding  yourselves  and  all  nations  into  the 
way  of  salvation.  So  S.  Cyril,  Theophylact,  Euthymius.  For  He 
would  not  teach  them  all  truth  in  this  life,  but  in  heaven.  So  S. 
Augustine  and  Bede.  In  the  Greek  [as  in  English  Version]  we  read 
“ will  guide  you  into  all  truth.”  For  the  way  to  attain  truth  is  study, 
examination  of  Holy  Scripture,  the  works  of  the  Fathers,  prayer  and 
invocation  of  the  Holy  Spirit  It  is  therefore  clear  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  gradually  taught  the  Apostles  more  and  greater  mysteries. 
It  is  plain  from  Acts  x.  that  long  after  Pentecost  He  revealed  to 


Digitized  by 


THE  TEACHER  OF  ALL  TRUTH.  163 

S.  Peter  that  the  Gospel  was  to  be  preached  to  the  Gentiles,  and 
from  Acts  xv.  that  the  Gentiles  were  not  to  be  circumcised,  or 
obliged  to  keep  the  law  of  Moses.  Wherefore  on  the  Thursday 
after  Pentecost  the  Church  prays,  “ We  beseech  Thee,  O Lord,  that 
the  Comforter,  who  proceedeth  from  Thee,  may  enlighten  our 
hearts,  and  lead  them,  as  Thy  Son  promised,  into  all  truth.” 

For  He  shall  not  speak  of  Himself  but  whatsoever  He  shall  hear , 
He  shall  speak . (1.)  S.  Chrysostom  explains,  He  shall  not  teach 

anything  contrary  to  what  I have  taught  (so  also  S.  Cyril,  Theo- 
phylact,  Rupertus,  Maldonatus).  S.  Chrysostom  says,  This  is  added, 
lest  by  saying  that  the  Holy  Spirit  would  teach  all  truth,  He  should 
make  Him  greater  than  the  Son,  as  though  He  did  not  teach  all 
truth.  (2.)  S.  Ambrose  (de Spirit.  Sancto , ii.  12)  explains,  “He  shall 
not  speak  of  Himself,”  ie.9  not  without  participation  with  the  Father 
and  Myself,  and  therefore  what  He  shall  speak  the  Father  and  the 
Son  will  speak  also.  (3.)  S.  Augustine  : “ He  speaks  as  breathed  by 
the  Father  and  the  Son.”  (4.)  It  is  best  explained  by  joining 
together  the  last  two  meanings  in  this  way : He  will  not  speak  of 
Himself,  but  by  the  will  of  the  Father  and  Myself,  for  He  is  " of” 
Both.  (See  Didymus  de  Sp . S.)  Christ  here  alludes  to  men  who 
are  said  to  speak  “ of  themselves  ” when  they  invent  anything  out 
of  their  own  brain,  and  not  according  to  the  truth  of  things.  But 
to  speak  in  this  way  " of  Himself,”  the  Spirit  could  not  do.  But 
again,  Christ  wished  to  teach  that  the  Father  and  Himself  were  both 
the  source  of  truth,  and  also  of  the  Holy  Spirit  Himself,  and  there- 
fore that  the  Holy  Spirit  would  teach  the  same  truth  as  He  had 
taught.  For  what  He  hath  heard  from  eternity,  He  hears,  and  will 
hear  for  ever,  as  deriving  it  together  with  His  Divine  Essence  both 
from  the  Father  and  the  Son.  Christ  also  often  said  that  He  spake 
not  of  Himself,  but  what  He  heard  from  the  Father.  For  to 
the  Father  belongs  the  source  of  origin,  of  essence,  and  of  know- 
ledge. Hear  S.  Augustine  (in  loc .) : “ For  Him  to  hear  is  to  know, 
and  to  know  is  to  Be.  From  Him  from  whom  He  proceeds,  is  His 
essence,  His  knowledge  and  His  hearing.  The  Holy  Spirit  ever 
hears,  because  He  ever  knows,”  And  Didymus : “ But  that  the  Father 


Digitized  by 


Google 


164  S.  JOHN,  C.  XVI. 

speaks  and  the  Son  hears,  signifies  their  common  nature  and 
consent.  But  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  is  the  Spirit  of  truth  and  wisdom, 
cannot  when  the  Son  speaks  hear  what  He  knew  not  before,  since 
it  is  of  His  very  nature  to  proceed  from  the  Son,  proceeding  as  the 
truth  from  the  truth,  the  Comforter  from  the  Comforter,  God  from 
God.” 

Again,  S.  Augustine  (ibid.)  : “ Let  it  not  move  you  that  the  word  is 
used  in  the  future  tense,  for  that  hearing  is  sempiternal,  because 
that  knowledge  is  sempiternal.  But  in  that  which  is  sempiternal, 
without  beginning  and  without  end,  a verb  of  particular  tense  is  put. 
Nor  do  we  say  untruthfully,  ‘Was/  and  ‘Is/  and  ‘Will  be:1 
'Was1  because  it  never  was  wanting,  ‘ Will  be 1 because  it  never 
will  be  wanting,  ‘ Is 1 because  it  ever  is.” 

And  He  will  show  you  things  to  come.  He  will  teach  you  every 
truth  which  concerns  yourselves  and  your  office  : not  only  past  and 
present,  but  also  future.  He  will  make  you,  not  only  Apostles  and 
Evangelists,  but  will  bestow  on  you  the  gift  of  Prophecy  (see  Acts 
/ xi.  28;  xx.  29;  xxi.  11.)  The  Apocalypse  of  S.  John  is  almost  a 
\ continuous  prophecy,  for  it  was  fitting  that  the  Apostles  should  be 
superior  to  the  Prophets  of  old.  Whence  Didymus  says  (de  Spirit. 
Sancto ):  “By  the  Spirit  of  truth  a perfect  knowledge  of  future 
events  is  conferred  on  the  Saints,  and  by  this  Prophets  looked  on 
things  future  as  though  they  were  present.  For  the  Holy  Spirit  is 
the  Spirit  of  truth  which  reveals  all  truths,  even  those  that  are 
future.  For  it  is  the  Spirit  of  Eternal  Wisdom  which  maketh  friends 
of  God  and  Prophets”  ( Wisd.  vii.  27).  S.  Chrysostom  gives  the 
reason.  He  roused  in  this  way  the  mind  of  the  Apostles ; for  man- 
kind are  most  eager  to  know  the  future.  He  therefore  freed  them 
from  this  anxiety,  by  showing  that  the  future  would  be  revealed  to 
them. 

Analogically,  Bede  says : “Show  them  things  to  come ; i.e.9  the  joys 
of  the  heavenly  country  and  the  sufferings  they  would  have  to  endure 
for  Christ.  The  Interlinear  Gloss  says,  “ Not  only  what  will  happen 
in  time,  but  also  in  eternity,  inflaming  them  with  the  love  of  them.” 
Ver.  14. — He  will  glorify  Me.  By  showing  Me  to  be  the  Son  of 


Digitized  by  VJ 


MEANING  OF  “ RECEIVE  OF  MINE.”  165 

God  : or  with  S.  Augustine  (in  loc.),  “By  shedding  abroad  love  in 
men’s  hearts,  and  making  them  spiritual,  He  declared  to  them  that 
the  Son  was  equal  to  the  Father,  though  they  had  before  known 
Him  in  the  flesh.  And  the  Apostles,  filled  with  boldness  by  that 
very  love,  and  having  banished  fear,  proclaimed  Christ  to  men,  and 
thus  was  His  fame  spread  abroad  over  the  whole  world ; for  that 
which  they  would  do  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  He  said  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  would  Himself  do.” 

For  He  shall  receive  of  mine.  That  is,  of  My  Divine  Essence,  says 
Nazianzen  (Oral,  de  Fide.\  and  consequently  of  My  will  and  know- 
ledge, for  this  He  ought  to  announce  to  you,  say  S.  Cyril,  Chry- 
sostom, Jansenius,  Toletus,  and  others.  Didymus  observes  : “ The 
Son,  in  giving,  loses  not  that  which  He  bestows,  nor  does  He 
impart  it  to  others,  to  His  own  loss.  Nor  does  the  Holy  Spirit 
receive  that  which  He  had  not  before.  The  Holy  Spirit  must  be 
understood  to  receive  from  the  Son  in  such  a manner  that  the 
substance  of  both  the  giver  and  receiver  should  be  recognised  as 
One  : and  so  also  the  Son  receives  His  subsistence  from  the  Father.” 
Maldonatus  thus,  “ He  will  receive  of  Mine,  that  is,  He  will  come 
in  My  name,  and  as  My  Legate  will  teach  no  other  doctrine  than 
Mine.”  But  this  seems  foreign  to  the  subject.  Nonnus  wrongly 
paraphrased,  “ He  shall  receive  of  My  Father,”  as  though  the  Holy 
Spirit  proceeded  from  the  Father  only. 

From  this  passage  the  Fathers  (and  even  the  Council  of  Florence, 
sess.  25)  prove  both  the  Diyinity  of  Christ,  and  the  Procession  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  from  both  the  Father  and  the  Son.  Maldonatus 
quotes  them  fully,  and  also  Bellarmine  (de  Christo , lib . ii.  23  and 
24  chap.)  And  Theodorus  of  Heraclea  (in  Cat.  Grcec.)  learnedly 
says,  “ The  Holy  Spirit  was  a witness  of  the  Divinity  of  the  Only 
Begotten,  since  He  came  of  His  essence,  and  made  known  His 
essence,”  for  the  Holy  Spirit  could  not  have  been  breathed  forth 
except  by  Him  who  was  God. 

But  why  did  Christ  say  “ of  Mine  ” and  not  “ of  Me  ” ? I reply, 
Because  the  Holy  Spirit  received  not  from  the  Son  all  that  is  in 
the  Son.  He  received  His  essence,  but  not  His  filiation.  But  it 


^Digitized  by 


Google 


1 66 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XVI. 


is  from  His  essence  and  filiation  that  He  is  constituted  as  the  Son, 
according  to  our  mode  of  conceiving  it.  And  Christ  so  explains  it 
in  the  next  verse,  “ All  things  that  the  Father  hath  are  Mine?  &c. 
Hence  it  is  plain  that  “ of  Mine  ” means  the  same  as  “ all  things  that 
the  Father  hath  are  Mine,”  i.e.  the  Godhead  with  all  its  attributes. 
Hence  Theophylact  explains,  “ of  Mine,”  i.e.  of  the  Treasure  of  the 
Godhead,  which  is  in  Me.  Heretics  therefore  wrongly  contended 
from  these  words  that  the  Holy  Spirit  was  not  God  by  nature,  but 
only  by  participation  (see  S.  Augustine  in  loc.,  and  S.  Cyril,  Thesaur. 
xiii.  4),  for  He  participates  in  the  Divine  Nature,  which  has  no 
parts,  but  is  wholly  indivisible  and  most  simple  Being. 

He  will  receive.  That  is,  He  has  received  from  all  eternity,  still 
receives,  and  will  ever  receive ; for  the  future  embraces  all  time,  and 
is  most  like  eternity,  for  it  endures  for  ever,  just  like  the  breathing 
of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  meaning  of  the  passage  is  this : Sorrow 
not,  because  when  I am  gone  ye  will  be  deprived  of  your  Teacher. 
For  I will  send  you  the  Holy  Ghost,  who,  as  being  purely  the 
Divine  Spirit,  will  teach  you  all  things  which  concern  the  salvation 
of  your  spirit.  But  when  He  is  teaching  you,  because  He  receives 
all  things  from  Me  from  whom  He  proceeds,  He  will  make  known 
to  you  My  Brightness  and  Glory,  for  He  will  receive  from  Me  all 
things  which  He  will  declare  to  you,  and  thus  I shall  speak  through 
Him,  and  show  Myself  to  you.  And  marvel  not  at  this : for  I,  by 
My  eternal  generation,  have  received  from  My  Father  everything 
which  He  Himself  has,  and  I have  therefore  received  from  Him  to 
be  with  Him  the  one  principle  (origin)  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

Ver.  15. — All  things  that  the  Father  hath  are  Mine.  For  all 
things,  saving  His  paternity  (says  the  Council  of  Florence),  the 
Father,  by  begetting  the  Son,  communicated  to  Him.  He  therefore 
communicated  to  the  Son  the  power  of  breathing  forth  the  Holy 
Spirit,  which  He  Himself  has.  He  therefore  adds  in  explanation, 
Therefore  I said , He  shall  receive  of  Mine  and  shall  declare  it  to  you. 
By  using  the  Name  Father  He  declared  Himself  to  be  the  Son,  but 
did  not  claim  the  Paternity,  as  Sabellius  taught.  But  all  things  which 
the  Father  hath  in  His  substance,  His  eternity,  His  unchangeable- 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  HOLY  SPIRIT  PROCEEDS  FROM  THE  SON.  1 6? 


ness,  His  goodness — all  these  hath  the  Son  also.”  And  S.  Hilary 
( de  Trinit  lib . viii.)  says,  “He  teaches  that  all  things  which  are  to 
be  received  from  the  Father,  are  yet  received  from  Himself,  for  all 
things  the  Father  hath  are  His.  The  general  statement  ( universitas ) 
does  not  admit  of  distinction.”  And  hence  it  is  again  inferred  that 
the  Holy  Spirit  proceeds  from  the  Son,  for  the  Son  hath  all  things 
which  the  Father  hath,  saving  His  Paternity.  I}ut  the  Father  has 
actively  the  power  of  breathing  forth  the  Holy  Spirit,  therefore  the 
Son  hath  the  same.  For  if  the  Father  and  the  Son  had  not  all 
things  in  common,  saving  their  opposite  relation  to  each  other  [as 
Father  and  Son],  they  would  be  distinguished  by  more  than  relation, 
and  consequently  be  diverse  in  substance.  For  the  Father  as 
breathing  forth  [the  Spirit]  is  not  co-relative  to  the  Son.  And 
therefore  if  He  is  distinguished  from  the  Son  by  His  breathing  forth 
the  Spirit,  He  is  distinguished  by  it,  not  as  something  relative,  but 
as  a kind  of  “ form  ” subsisting  in  the  Father,  and  therefore  the 
Father  and  the  Son  differ  in  substance,  which  is  the  Arian  heresy. 

Ver.  1 6. — A little  while , and  ye  shall  not  see  Me;  and  again , a little 
while , and  ye  shall  see  Me , because  I go  to  the  Father , For  in  a few 
hours  I shall  die  on  the  cross,  and  be  buried,  but  in  three  days  I 
shall  rise  again,  and  manifest  Myself  to  you  with  great  joy,  for  I 
shall  shortly  afterwards  ascend  into  heaven,  and  sit  at  the  right  hand 
of  the  Father.  For  I shall  not  be  detained  by  death,  but  shall 
conquer  it  in  My  own  Person,  and  with  you  overcome  it  also. 
So  S.  Chrysostom,  Cyril,  Leontius,  Theophylact,  Euthymius,  &c, 
S.  Augustine,  Bede,  and  Maldonatus  explain  it  otherwise.  I shall 
abide  with  you  for  forty  days  only,  and  then  after  My  ascension  ye 
will  see  Me  no  more,  then  after  another  “ little  time,”  ye  will  see 
Me  again,  in  the  day  of  judgment,  and  the  general  resurrection, 
when  I shall  take  you  both  in  body  and  soul  into  heaven  with  My- 
self, I will  bless  and  glorify  you.  For  I go  to  My  Father,  to  reign 
with  Him  in  glory  until  that  time.  And  this  whole  period,  though 
one  of  many  thousand  years,  is  but  like  a small  point  compared  with 
the  eternity  of  God. 

Hear  S.  Augustine  (in  loc.) : “ The  whole  space  which  the  present 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


1 68 


S.  JOHN,  c.  XVI. 


age  of  the  world  passes  through  is  but  a little  while.  As  the  same 
Evangelist  says  (i  John  ii.  18),  * It  is  the  last  hour/  ” And  further  on, 
“ This  ‘ little  while 1 seems  long  to  us,  because  it  is  yet  going  on.  But 
when  it  is  ended,  we  shall  feel  how  short  it  has  been.  Let  not  then 
our  joy  be  like  that  of  the  world,  of  which  it  is  said  ‘the  world 
shall  rejoice/  Nor  let  us  be  sorrowful,  and  without  joy,  in  our 
travailing  with  this  longing  desire,  but  as  the  Apostle  says,  ‘ Rejoic- 
ing in  hope,  patient  in  tribulation,’  because  she  who  is  in  travail  (to 
whom  we  are  compared)  rejoices  more  at  the  child  which  will  be 
bom  of  her,  than  she  sorrows  for  her  present  suffering.”  Hence  the 
Psalmist,  and  after  him  2 Peter  iii.  8,  One  day  is  with  the  Lord  as 
a thousand  years,  &c. 

Ver.  17. — Then  said  some  of  His  disciples  among  themselves,  What 
is  this  that  He  saith  unto  us?  ...  . We  cannot  tell  what  He  saith. 
Christ’s  words  seemed  to  be  obscure,  a very  enigma,  and  no  wonder, 
for  it  is  just  the  same  to  many  Christians  even  now.  Christ  did  this 
intentionally,  to  rouse  the  minds  of  the  sorrowing  Apostles  to  ask 
the  meaning  of  this  strange  expression  : so  that  He,  in  His  answer, 
might  remove,  or  anyhow  mitigate,  their  sorrow.  S.  Chrysostom, 
Theophylact,  and  Euthymius  give  two  reasons  for  their  asking: 
because  His  words  were  obscure  in  themselves;  and  secondly, 
because  they  were  weighed  down  with  sorrow.  Rupertus  adds  that 
they  did  not  yet  certainly  believe  that  He  would  rise  again  on 
the  third  day.  S.  Augustine  and  Bede  give  a further  reason  for 
their  being  troubled  at  the  twice  repeated  expression  “a  little  while 
namely,  that  the  brief  pleasure  of  this  life  is  changed,  in  the  next 
life,  into  eternal  and  unbounded  joy.  See  2 Cor.  iv,  17.  Take 
which  view  you  prefer. 

Ver.  19. — But  Jesus  knew  that  they  wished  to  ask  Him.  But 
dared  not  through  fear  and  dread.  Christ  knew  this  by  the  Power 
of  His  Godhead,  looking  into  their  secret  thoughts  and  inward 
desires.  He  therefore  anticipated  their  reply,  to  show  that  He 
knew  all  hearts,  and  was  therefore  God  (so  Cyril) ; and  He  adds, 

Ver.  '20. — Verily , verily,  l say  unto  you , that  ye  shall  weep  and 
lament , but  the  world  shall  rejoice : ye  shall  be  sorrowful , but  your 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


CHRISTIANS  HAVE  SORROW  NOW.  1 6g 

sorrow  shall  be  turned  into  joy . Understand  by  this  that  the  joy 
of  the  world  will  be  changed  into  sorrow,  says  Rupertus.  But  (i.)  S. 
Chrysostom,  Cyril,  Leontius,  Theophylact,  and  others,  explain  this 
of  our  Lord's  sufferings  and  death,  which  will  cause  just  sorrow  to 
you,  and  rejoicing  to  the  Jews,  and  of  His  Resurrection  on  the 
third  day,  at  which  the  Jews  will  be  sorrowful,  and  full  of  indignation 
at  My  victory  over  them.  But  in  a secondary  sense  He  intended 
to  signify  the  like  sufferings  they  would  have  to  endure  for  His  sake. 
Whence  (2.)  S.  Augustine,  Bede,  and  Maldonatus  explain  of  the 
sufferings  which  the  Apostles  would  have  to  undergo  in  preaching 
the  faith  (at  which  the  world  will  rejoice),  and  of  the  eternal 
blessedness  they  would  afterwards  enjoy  with  Him. 

Morally.  Holy  Scripture  frequently  teaches  that  the  righteous 
suffer  adversities  in  this  life,  and  that  the  ungodly  exult  in  their 
prosperity.  (See  Job  xxi.  9 ; Ps.  lxxxiii.  2 ; Jer.  xii ; Hab.  iii.) 
Daily  experience  teaches  us  the  same.  But  Scripture  teaches  us  also 
that  the  godly  are  happy  and  the  wicked  are  sorrowful  at  theii 
death;  see  Luke  vL  25  ; S.  James  v.  2,  3 ; and  Rom.  viii.  18.  “ It 

is  difficult  (says  S.  Jerome,  Epist.  xxxiv.),  nay,  impossible,  for  any  one 
to  enjoy  his  good  things  both  here  and  hereafter,  to  fill  his  belly 
here,  and  his  soul  there,  to  pass  from  delight  to  delight,  to  be  the 
first  in  both  worlds,  to  appear  high  in  glory  both  in  heaven  and  earth.” 

Accordingly,  Tertullian  ( de  Sped . cap.  28),  commenting  with 
elegance  and  tenderness  on  these  words,  thus  writes : “ This  is 
ordered  in  turns.  Now  they  rejoice,  we  are  in  conflict.  ‘The  world 
will  rejoice;  but  ye  will  be  sorrowful.'  Let  us  mourn  while  the 
heathen  rejoice,  that  we  may  rejoice  when  they  begin  to  mourn ; 
lest  if  we  now  rejoice  with  them,  we  shall  then  also  mourn  with  them. 
Thou  art  over-nice,  O Christian,  if  thou  desirest  pleasure  in  this 
world  ; also  most  foolish,  if  thou  considerest  it  pleasure.”  And 
again,  “ Pray  tell  me,  cannot  we  live  without  pleasure,  since  we  must 
die  without  it?  For  what  else  is  our  wish  than  that  of  the  Apostles, 
to  depart  out  of  the  world,  and  to  be  received  with  the  Lord? 
This  is  our  pleasure,  as  it  is  also  our  desire.”  He  goes  on,  “ What 
greater  pleasure  than  the  loathing  of  pleasure,  than  contempt  of  the 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


170  S.  JOHN,  C.  XVI. 

world,  than  true  liberty,  than  a pure  conscience,  than  sufficiency  of 
life,  than  no  dread  of  death,  than  trampling  down  the  gods  of  the 
heathep,  than  casting  out  devils,  than  working  cures,  than  living  to 
God?  These  are  the  pleasures  of  Christians,  holy,  ever  abiding, 
free,  &c.  Bestir  thyself  at  the  signal  of  God,  awake  at  the  trump  of 
the  angel,  glory  in  the  palms  of  martyrdom.  Behold  uncleanness 
cast  down  by  chastity,  unbelief  slain  by  faith,  cruelty  beaten  by 
mercy,  wantonness  overshadowed  by  modesty.  Such  are  the  contests 
in  which  we  are  crowned.”  And  again,  “ What  is  that  exultation  of 
angels,  what  the  glory  of  the  rising  saints,  what  hereafter  the  king- 
dom of  righteousness,  what  the  city  of  the  New  Jerusalem  ? ” Isaiah 
graphically  describes  this  (lxv.  14). 

Hence  S Cecilia,  who  ever  bare  the  Gospel  of  Christ  in  her 
bosom,  and  also  preached  it,  converted  Tiburtius  and  others.  And 
she  inculcated  this  first  of  all : Seek  not  the  fleeting  joy  of  this  life, 
in  order  that  ye  may  obtain  the  eternal  joy  of  that  life  which  follows 
after.  In  this  ye  will  live  but  a short  time,  in  that  ye  will  live  for 
ever.  And  when  the  Prefect  Almachius  said  that  she  was  foolish 
in  despising  the  joys  of  this  world  and  embracing  the  hard  and 
austere  life  of  Christians,  her  husband  Valerian  replied,  “ The  time 
will  come  when  we  shall  receive  a thousand-fold  the  fruits  of  our 
affliction,  and  they  who  are  now  elated  with  joy  will  weep  when 
we  are  rejoicing.”  This  is  the  time  of  sowing.  They  therefore 
who  sow  tears  in  this  life  will  in  that  blessed  and  eternal  life  reap 
everlasting  joy. 

Lastly,  S.  Cyprian  in  his  treatise  De  Mortalitate  (the  Pestilence), 
chap.  3,  says  : — “ If  to  see  Christ  is  to  rejoice,  and  our  joy  cannot 
be,  unless  we  see  Him,  what  blindness  is  it,  what  madness,  to 
love  the  sufferings,  the  pains  and  tears  of  the  world,  and  not  rather 
to  hasten  to  that  joy  which  cannot  be  taken  from  us  ? * 

Ver.  21. — A woman  when  she  is  in  travail  hath  sorrow , because  her 
hour  is  come : but  when  she  is  delivered  of  the  child , she  remembereth  no 
more  the  anguish , for  joy  that  a man  is  bom  into  the  world.  As 
hoping  that  the  child  will  be  a support  and  credit  to  her  in  this 
life,  and  will  succeed  her  after  her  death.  For  since  men  cannot 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


JOY  WHEN  A MAN  IS  BORN. 


I7t 


themselves  live  for  ever,  they  hope  in  a sense  to  live  in  their 
children.  A queen  rejoices  in  her  first-born  as  having  borne  a 
king.  This  illustration  is  most  apposite.  For  Christ  compares 
His  death  to  child-birth,  and  His  resurrection  to  the  joy  after  child- 
birth. For  Christ  suffered  anguish  and  tortures  like  a woman  in 
child-birth,  but  when  He  saw  Himself  rising  again  through  the 
merit  of  His  death,  and  knew  that  we  should  in  like  manner  rise 
again,  He  greatly  rejoiced  Himself,  and  inspired  the  Apostles  and 
all  the  faithful  with  great  joy.  For  He  brought  them  forth  as  His 
children,  by  dying  for  them  on  the  Cross.  So  S.  Chrysostom, 
Cyril,  Theophylact,  Euthymius.  You  may  apply  this  also  to  the 
persecutions  and  sufferings  of  the  Apostles  and  faithful  in  this  life, 
and  to  their  joy  and  exultation  at  the  Resurrection. 

A man-child . “ Because,”  as  says  S.  Augustine  (in  loc.),  “ the  joy  is 
wont  to  be  greater  when  a boy  is  bom,  to  signify  mystically  that  the 
faithful  ought  to  be  of  a masculine  mind  both  in  doing  and  suffering, 
for  they  are  called  to  the  contemplation  of  heavenly  things,  and  even 
to  take  heaven  by  storm,  not  to  the  softness  of  this  world,”  as  says 
Gloss,  inter.  Moreover,  this  man-child  is  afterwards  called  “ a man  ” 
to  signify  the  Resurrection  of  Christ,  for  by  His  resurrection  Christ, 
as  it  were,  is  bom  again,  not  as  a child,  but  as  a perfect  man.  So 
S.  Chrysostom  says:  By  saying  a man  He  simply  suggests  His 
own  Resurrection,  and  our  own  blessedness  after  death]  further, 
says  Alcuin,  “ we  shall  be  bom  into  eternal  life.”  Whence  Bede  says, 
“ It  ought  not  to  seem  a strange  thing,  if  he  who  departs  out  of 
this  life  is  said  to  be  ‘bom.*  For  as  he  who  comes  forth  from  his 
mother’s  womb  into  this  light,  so  is  he  who  is  freed  from  the  bonds 
of  the  flesh  raised  up  to  eternal  life.  Hence  the  solemnities  of  the 
Saints  are  said  to  be  their  birthdays,  not  their  burials.” 

Moreover,  the  sorrow  of  the  disciples  is  rightly  compared  to  that 
of  a woman  in  travail : (i.)  Because  both  are  painful,  and  the  pain 
is  greater  at  th$  birth  of  a boy.  (2.)  Because  they  are  short.  (3.) 
And  perilous.  (4.)  Both  turned  into  joy,  the  one  by  the  birth  of 
a child,  the  other  by  the  Resurrection  of  Christ  and  His  followers. 
So  S.  Cyril  (5.)  As  the  same  child  is  the  cause  of  pain  in  being 


Digitized  by 


Google 


XJ2 


S.  JOHN,  c.  XVI. 


bom,  and  of  joy  afterwards,  so  Christ  also  caused  great  pain  to  the 
disciples  by  His  death,  and  great  joy  by  His  Resurrection.  (6.) 
The  joy  in  either  case  is  surpassing  and  very  great,  and  swallows 
up  all  the  preceding  pain. 

Ver.  22. — And  ye  now  therefore  have  sorrow : but  I will  see  you 
again , and  your  hearts  shall  rejoice , &c.  This  is  the  application  of 
the  parable,  points  out  its  scope  and  profitable  teaching.  He 
compares  the  two  cases,  of  a woman  in  child-birth  and  the  Apostles, 
both  in  the  present  suffering  and  the  subsequent  joys.  Your  joy 
will  remain  for  ever.  For  I shall  rise  glorious  and  immortal,  I shall 
die  no  more.  I shall  be  present  to  aid  you  in  all  your  persecutions 
and  afflictions ; I will  make  you  superior  to  all  adversities,  and  at 
last  crown  you  with  a glorious  martyrdom,  and  raise  you  to  heavenly 
and  eternal  joys  which  no  one  will  take  from  you.  Christ  then 
speaks  first  of  the  joy  of  the  Apostles  at  His  own  Resurrection,  and 
secondarily  of  their  own  resurrection  and  happiness,  which  is  brought 
forth  by  the  labour  and  pain  of  this  life,  as  a child  by  the  pain 
of  child-birth.  S.  Cyprian  (ad  Demetrium)  [chap,  xl]  excellently 
says,  “A  man  whose  whole  glory  and  happiness  is  in  the  world, 
suffers  punishment  by  worldly  misfortunes.  He  weeps  and  groans 
if  evil  befall  him  in  this  world,  who  cannot  fare  well  when  life  is 
past  Whose  pleasure  is  all  enjoyed  in  this  life,  whose  consolations 
all  end  here,  whose  frail  and  brief  life  counts  upon  having  some 
sweetness  and  pleasure  here.  But  when  they  go  hence,  pain  and 
sorrow  alone  await  them.  But  they  whose  hopes  rest  on  future  bless- 
ings, feel  no  pain  at  the  assaults  of  present  ills.  In  a word,  we  are 
not  astounded,  or  crushed,  or  grieved  by  adversities.  We  murmur 
not  at  any  disaster,  or  bodily  weakness ; living  in  the  Spirit  more  than 
in  the  flesh,  we  triumph  over  the  weakness  of  our  body  by  the 
strength  of  our  mind.”  And  just  below:  “There  flourishes  among 
us  the  strength  of  hope,  and  the  stedfastness  of  faith,  and  even 
among  the  ruins  of  a falling  world  our  mind  is  erect,  our  resolution 
unmoved,  our  patience  is  ever  full  of  joy,  and  our  soul  ever  rests 
secure  on  its  God.” 

Ye  have  sorrow . Ye  are  sorrowful  on  account  of  My  departure 


— Digitized  by 


Goo  — 


TRAVAIL  FOR  SOULS. 


173 


and  by  death,  and  after  My  death  ye  will  be  sorrowful  on  account 
of  your  impending  persecutions  and  crosses.  “ And  so  also  will  other 
believers  be  full  of  sorrow,  who  through  tears  and  sufferings  are 
striving  after  eternal  joys,”  says  Alcuin.  Moreover,  as  S.  Augustine 
observes  on  these  sufferings,  “ we  are  not  sorrowful  without  joy,  but 
as  the  Apostle  says  (Rom.  xii.  12)  “rejoicing  in  hope,,,  for  the 
travailing  woman  to  whom  we  are  compared,  is  gladdened  more  at  the 
child  who  is  about  to  be  bom,  than  saddened  by  her  present  pangs.” 

Tropologically.  The  mind  of  a penitent  sinner,  and  also  the  mind 
of  a righteous  man,  when  thinking  on  martrydom,  entrance  into 
“ religion,”  or  any  other  difficult  and  heroic  work,  is  like  a woman  in 
her  pangs,  because  he  strives  with  great  pain  and  labour  to  bring  His 
conversion,  martyrdom,  or  entrance  into  religion,  to  the  birth.  Read  S. 
Augustine  (Conf.  viii.  8),  where  he  records  with  what  great  effort  he 
brought  to  the  birth  his  purpose  of  a new  life.  As  Isaiah  says  (chap, 
xxvl  17.)  But  yet  this  travailing  causes  great  joy.  But  the  ungodly 
in  like  manner  bring  their  evil  deeds  to  the  birth  with  great  labour 
and  pain,  which  turns  into  the  torments  of  hell  at  last.  See  Isaiah 
lix.  4 ; Ps.  vii.  14 ; Wisd.  v.  7,  and  elsewhere. 

Again,  a preacher,  a confessor,  or  any  one  else  who  strives  to  wia 
souls  to  God,  does  it  with  great  travail.  Whence  S.  Gregory  {Moral,  xxx. 
9)  compares  such  an  one  to  a labouring  hind,  which  with  great  difficulty 
brings  forth  her  young,  and  bellows  through  pain.  Explaining  Job 
xxxix.  1.  Few  persons  think  what  labour  is  displayed  in  the  preaching 
of  the  Fathers.  With  what  pangs,  with  what  efforts  in  faith  and 
conversation,  do  they  bring  forth  souls.  How  do  they  look  round 
with  careful  observation,  so  as  to  be  bold  in  their  directions,  compas- 
sionate in  infirmities,  gentle  in  their  exhortations,  humble  in  display- 
ing authority,  resolute  in  contempt  of  earthly  things,  unbending  in 
enduring  hardships,  and  yet  weak  in  not  ascribing  their  strength  to 
themselves.  How  pained  for  those  that  fall,  how  anxious  for  those 
that  still  stand,  with  what  fervour  they  strive  to  attain  to  more,  with 
what  fear  to  keep  fast  what  they  have  already  attained  to. 

And  your  joy  no  man  will  take  from  you . “ Because  Christ, 

who  dieth  no  more,  is  their  joy”  ( Gloss  Inter.)  And  that  will  be 


Digitized  by 


Google 


*74 


S.  JOHN,  c.  XVI. 


more  true  in  heaven.  Hence  S.  Augustine  (in  loc.\  “Nor  will 
any  end  suffice,  save  that  of  which  there  is  no  end.” 

Ver.  23. — And  in  that  day  ye  shall  ask  Me  nothing.  The  word 
ifurfiesrt  signifies  either,  ye  will  ask  Me  no  questions , or  ye  will 
ask  Me  for  nothing,  make  no  request 

1.  S.  Cyril  explains  it  in  the  first  sense  : “ There  will  be  no  need 
to  ask  Me  anything,  when  I have  risen  and  sent  the  Holy  Spirit 
For  I by  my  rising,  and  He  by  His  coming,  will  teach  you  all  things 
which  concern  your  office.  They  had  in  their  ignorance  asked  Him 
many  things : ‘ Whither  goest  Thou  ? ' i How  can  we  know  the 
way? ' * Show  us  the  Father.'  1 Why  dost  Thou  manifest  Thyself 
to  us,  and  not  unto  the  world?'  see  chap.  xiv.  5,  8,  22.  And  here 
too  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  words  ‘ a little  while.'  He  fittingly 
replies,  the  Holy  Spirit  will  so  enlighten  you,  that  ye  will  have  no 
need  to  ask  questions,  as  ye  did  before.”  So  also  Euthymius. 

2.  S.  Chrysostom  (Mom.  78),  Theophylact,  Ribera,  and  others 
explain  it  thus,  “ After  My  Resurrection  ye  will  have  no  need  to  pray 
to  Me,  ye  will  have  only  to  ask  the  Father  in  My  name.  This  is 
supported  by  what  next  follows.”  (3.)  S.  Augustine  combines  both 
tjiese  explanations,  and  refers  to  the  day  of  heavenly  glory.  “ He 
was  asked  by  the  disciples,”  he  says,  “when  He  would  restore  the 
kingdom  to  Israel.  He  was  asked  by  S.  Stephen  to  receive  his  spirit. 
I therefore  think  that  what  He  here  says  must  be  referred  to  the 
time  when  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is,  when  nothing  will  remain 
to  be  desired,  no  secret  will  have  to  be  inquired  about.” 

Verily , Verily > / say  unto  you  (I  most  surely  promise  you,  S. 
Augustine  says,  “ I swear,”  regarding  the  words  as  an  oath,  whatsoever 
ye  shall  ask  the  Father  in  My  Name , He  will  give  it  you . This  is  a 
fresh  consolation  of  the  Apostles,  a fresh  instruction  given  by  Christ 
that  they  should  use  His  aid,  though  absent,  to  obtain  all  that  they 
needed  from  the  Father,  viz.,  by  asking  in  His  Name.  Be  not  dis- 
tressed at  My  absence.  For  I solemnly  promise  that  the  Father  will 
give  whatever  ye  ask  in  My  Name.  Ye  used  to  ask  everything  from 
Me.  I am  going  away,  and  I put  the  Father  in  My  place.  What 
ye  used  to  ask  of  Me,  ask  now  of  the  Father.  He  will  as  readily,  as 


GOD  DWELLS  IN  US. 


175 


lovingly,  and  as  fully,  hear  and  understand  you  as  I used  to  do. 
And  object  not  to  the  absence  or  the  distance,  the  Father  being  in 
heaven,  and  you  on  earth.  For  the  Father  is  on  earth  also  (since 
He  is  everywhere).  Nay,  He  is  within  you,  in  your  mind  and  soul, 
and  that  not  merely  by  His  essence,  presence,  and  power,  but  also 
by  His  Grace.  For  your  soul  is  His  abode  and  temple,  in  which 
He  desires  to  be  praised,  worshipped,  and  invoked  by  you.  There- 
fore invoke  Him  there  as  most  familiarly  and  intimately  present, 
and  He  will  hear  you  then. 

Each  word  is  emphatical.  (1.)  I promise  jwa,  because  ye  are  My 
intimates,  My  disciples  and  Apostles,  whom  I specially  love,  that  I 
will  have  a special  care  of  you,  and  provide  for  you  in  everything. 
And  this  is  said  through  the  Apostles  to  the  faithful  in  every  age,  as 
represented  by  them.  (2.)  Whatsoever , that  is,  which  is  profitable  for 
you,  and  for  the  honour  of  God.  “ Something  which  is  something, 
and  not  a mere  nothing,”  (Gloss  Inter.)  And  as  S.  Augustine  says 
(in  loc.),  “something,  which  is  not  ‘nothing1  in  comparison  with 
the  Blessed  Life.”  He  therefore  who  asks  for  anything  unlawful  or 
hurtful  is  not  heard.  And  though  we  may  ask  for  things  temporal, 
as  health,  wealth,  &c.,  yet  ye  ought  to  ask  them  for  a good  purpose, 
that  by  them  we  may  the  more  please  God,  and  perform  more  good 
works.  (3. ) We  should  ask  in  a proper  manner : that  is,  humbly, 
reverently,  confidently,  ardently,  perseveringly.  (4.)  The  Father , 
as  sons  asking  a father,  for  He  loves  you  supremely  with  fatherly 
affection.  5.  “In  My  Name”  by  Me  and  My  merits,  not  your 
own.  6.  “He  will  give  it  you”  surely  and  certainly,  if  ye  ask  aright 

In  My  Name.  Plead  this  with  the  Father,  and  it  will  obtain 
everything.  “He  sets  forth  the  virtue  of  His  Name”  (says 
S.  Chrysostom),  “ for  when  He  is  merely  ‘ named  * before  the  Father, 
He  worketh  marvellous  things.  Think  not  that  ye  will  be  left; 
My  Name  will  give  you  full  confidence.” 

But  what  is  it  to  ask  in  the  Name  of  Christ  ? S.  Gregory  (Horn. 
xxvil)  tells  us  “Jesus  is  the  Name  of  the  Son.  It  means  Saviour. 
He  therefore  asks  in  the  Name  of  the  Saviour,  who  asks  that  which 
pertains  to  real  salvation,  for  if  that  is  asked  which  is  not  expedient, 


by  Google 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XVI. 


176 

it  is  not  asked  in  Christ’s  Name.  The  Lord  therefore  says  to  the 
Apostles,  who  were  still  weak  in  the  faith,  “ Hitherto  have  ye  asked 
nothing  in  My  Name,  because  ye  know  not  how  to  seek  for  eternal 
salvation.  And  hence  it  is  that  S.  Paul  was  not  heard,  because  if 
he  had  been  freed  from  temptation  it  would  not  have  profited  him  ” 
(2  Cor.  xii.)  And  further  on,  “Weigh  well  your  petitions ; see  if  ye 
ask  in  the  Name  of  Jesus.  For  ye  seek  not  Jesus,  in  the  house  of 
Jesus,  if  in  the  temple  of  eternity  ye  pray  importunately  for  temporal 
things ; for  a wife,  a house,  clothing,  or  food.”  And  S.  Augustine  : “ A 
thing  is  not  asked  in  the  Name  of  the  Saviour,  if  it  be  asked  contrary 
to  the  purpose  of  salvation ; and  he  who  thinks  of  Christ  what  he 
ought  not  to  think  of  the  only  Son  of  God,  does  not  ask  in  His 
Name.  But  he  who  asks  as  he  ought  receives  when  he  ought  to 
receive.  For  some  things  are  not  denied  but  deferred,  in  order  that 
they  may  be  given  at  a fitting  time.”  So  Bede,  Rupert,  and  S. 
Thomas.  All  this  is  quite  true,  not  literally  but  symbolically. 

2d.  S.  Cyril,  and  after  him  Jansenius,  say  more  literally,  “He 
speaks  in  My  Name  who  so  speaks  that  Christ  may  manifest 
Himself  as  the  Mediator,  and,  together  with  the  Father,  the  Giver 
of  grace.  For  as  God  He  and  the  Father  together  confer  gifts  upon 
us,  but  as  Mediator  He  presents  our  prayers  to  the  Father,  for  He 
gives  us  boldness  and  confidence  to  approach  the  Father.” 

3d.  Euthymius  says  “In  My  name”  means  as  My  people,  as 
Christians. 

4th.  The  genuine  meaning  is  given  by  S.  Chrysostom,  Theo- 
phylact,  Toletus,  and  others,  who  say,  “To  ask  in  the  Name  of 
Christ  is  to  ask  through  the  merits  of  Christ.  For  He,  by  His  death, 
merited  for  us  that  we  should  obtain  whatever  we  ask  of  God. 
This  with  respect  to  us  is  grace,  with  respect  to  Christ  is  but  justice. 
His  name  signifies  in  Scripture  His  strength,  virtue,  merits,  grace, 
dignity,  and  authority.  To  ask  in  the  Name  of  Christ,  is  in  asking 
to  allege  His  merits,  and  to  trust  in  them,  not  in  our  own ; that  God 
may  thus  look,  not  on  our  unworthiness  and  our  sins,  but  upon  the 
face  of  His  Anointed,  and  for  His  holiness  and  merits  grant  us  that 
which  we  do  not  deserve.  Christ  therefore  points  here  not  merely  to 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


PRAYER  THROUGH  CHRIST. 


1 71 

God,  but  to  God  Incarnate,  and  obedient  as  far  as  unto  the  death 
of  the  Cross.  For  He  merited  for  us,  that  the  Father  should  hear 
our  prayers.  And  thus  the  Church  ends  all  her  prayers  ‘ through 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ/  ” Th^  Jews,  in  like  manner,  used  to  pray 
through  the  merits  of  Abraham,  &c.  We  through  the  merits  of 
Christ,  which  infinitely  surpass  theirs. 

Fifthly,  Ribera  explains  thus,  ‘‘  Ask  as  sent  by  Me,  as  though  I 
through  you  ask  this  of  the  Father.  Ask  not  as  though  it  were  to 
be  given  to  you,  but  to  Me,  as  a king  makes  request  to  the  Pontiff 
through  his  legate,  and  as  the  brethren  of  Joseph  prayed  him  for  their 
father's  sake  to  forgive  their  iniquity,  as  though  He  had  taken  it  upon 
himself,  and  demanded  that  it  should  be  forgiven.  In  like  manner 
Christ  confers  on  us  His  merits,  the  authority  and  grace  which  He 
has  with  the  Father,  that  we  may  ask  the  Father  through  them." 

Again,  to  ask  in  the  name  of  Christ,  is  to  ask  those  things  which 
He  wishes  and  desires  to  be  given  us,  those  namely  which  concern 
the  salvation  of  the  soul.  Hence  such  a prayer  is  effectual,  and  is 
heard  by  God.  And  so  too  the  prayers  which  many  use,  “ O Lord, 
give  me  that  which  my  Lord  Christ  desires  to  be  in  me,  which  He 
wishes  to  be  given  me,  for  which  He  prayed  when  dying  on  the 
Cross,  and  entreated  should  be  given  me : again,  what  the  Blessed 
Virgin  wishes  for  me,  and  asks  for  me,  for  she  greatly  longs  for  my 
salvation,  and  knows  better  than  myself  what  is  best  for  me."  This 
is  a pious  meaning  of  the  words,  but  the  fourth  is  more  literal,  and 
to  the  point. 

He  will  give  it  you.  But  you  will  say,  ‘We  find  that  many  ask 
of  God,  and  obtain  not ; how  then  can  this  be  said  ? ' I answer, 
The  reason  they  obtain  not,  is  because  they  ask  not  the  things 
which  they  ought,  nor  in  the  way  they  ought.  As  S.  James  says 
^iv.  3).  For  many  affirmative  propositions  in  Scripture  require 
certain  conditions.  And  prayer  requires:  (1.)  Humility  and  rever- 
ence, and  therefore  he  who  has  it  not,  but  prays  proudly  and  pre- 
sumptuously, like  the  Pharisee,  gains  nothing.  (2.)  It  requires  contri- 
tion for  sin,  so  that  he  who  prays  may  be,  or  may  heartily  wish  to 

be,  a friend  of  God.  Sinners  therefore,  wilfully  persisting  in  sin,  are 

VOL.  v.  m 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


178 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XVI. 


not  heard  by  God.  Dost  thou  wish  God  to  hear  thee  ? Do  thou  first 
obey  His  will,  and  so  God  will  do  thy  will,  and  fulfil  thy  desires. 
See  Isa.  i.  15.  (3.)  It  requires  great  faith  and  confidence  that  we 

shall  obtain  what  we  ask  for  through  the  merits  of  Christ.  This 
confidence  many  have  not,  and  therefore  they  obtain  not  (James  i. 
6).  Hence  S.  Basil  ( Constit . Monast . cap . ii.)  assigns  the  reason  for 
our  not  being  heard,  “ Thou  hast  not  asked  rightly,  for  thou  askedst 
either  with  doubting,  or  when  engaged  on  something  else.”  (4.)  It 
requires  perseverance  (see  Luke  xi.  7 and  8).  S.  Augustine  (Tract 
lxxiii.)  rightly  observes,  “God  occasionally  refuses  what  we  ask  for, 
because  this  is  more  expedient  for  our  salvation  and  His  glory  : God 
therefore  hears  us,  not  according  to  our  wishes,  but  as  it  is  best  for  our 
salvation.  And  thus  He  hearkened  not  to  S.  Paul  when  he  prayed 
to  be  delivered  from  the  thorn  in  the  flesh,  because  it  was  more  pro- 
fitable to  him,  to  humble  him,  and  that  he  might  continually  struggle 
with  and  overcome  it.”  See  2 Cor.  xii.  9. 

Give  it  you.  Hence  S.  Augustine  (in  loc.)  thinks  that  the  result  of 
prayer  is  promised  only  when  we  pray  for  ourselves,  but  not  when 
we  pray  for  others ; for,  says  he,  “ The  Saints  are  heard  for  themselves, 
not  for  all  For  it  is  said,  ‘ I will  give  it  you.*”  But  S.  Basil  (Reg. 
brevier , 261),  Toletus,  and  others,  more  correctly,  and  in  a more  liberal 
sense,  think  that  the  promise  holds  good,  whether  we  pray  for  our- 
selves or  for  others.  For  God  gives  us  that  which  He  gives  to 
others  for  whom  we  pray.  When  we  pray,  He  gives  us  the  fruit  of  our 
prayer.  And  this  more  accords  with  the  very  bountiful  beneficence 
of  God.  Besides,  to  pray  for  others,  is  a work  of  greater  charity, 
especially  if  we  pray  for  our  enemies.  And  such  a prayer  as  this  is 
wont  to  be  heard,  as  Christ  was  heard  in  behalf  of  His  crucifiers, 
and  S.  Stephen  when  praying  for  Saul.  S.  Gregory  (Horn,  xxvii.) 
gives  the  reason : “The  virtue,”  he  says,  “of  true  prayer  is  the  very 
sublimest  charity.  And  a man  obtains  that  which  he  rightly  asks 
for,  when  his  mind  is  not  darkened  when  he  prays,  even  by  hatred 
of  his  enemy.  But  we  often  overcome  the  reluctance  of  our  mind 
to  pray,  when  we  pray  for  our  enemies.” 

Moreover,  when  occasionally  we  are  not  heard  when  we  pray  for 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


WE  MUST  CO-OPERATE  WITH  GOD. 


179 


others,  it  is  either  our  own  fault,  or  the  fault  of  them  for  whom  we 
pray,  who  by  their  sloth  or  evil  disposition  render  themselves 
unworthy  of  the  grace  of  God,  and  at  times  rail  against  Him,  and 
despise  His  call. 

There  is  an  instance  in  the  Lives  of  the  Fathers.  A certain  man 
tempted  with  the  spirit  of  lust,  asked  the  prayers  of  a holy  anchoret, 
that  he  might  obtain  deliverance.  He  prayed  again  and  again,  but 
to  no  purpose.  When  he  wondered  at  this,  God  replied,  He  does 
not  deserve  to  be  heard,  because  by  lazily  cherishing  obscene  thoughts 
and  trifling  with  them,  he  is  the  cause  of  his  own  temptation.  The 
anchoret  told  him  this,  and  then,  moved  with  compunction,  the 
man  gave  himself  to  prayer,  watching  and  fasting,  and  obtained 
deliverance  from  his  temptation.  Those  who  are  tempted  should 
therefore  co-operate  with  those  who  are  praying  for  them,  in  order 
that  they  may  be  heard.  Just  as  a sick  man  should  co-operate  with 
his  physician,  in  order  to  his  cure.  But  if  he  refuses  to  do  so,  all 
the  labour  of  the  physician  is  useless. 

Ver.  24. — Hitherto  have  ye  asked  nothing  in  My  Name . Because  ye 
have  trusted  in  My  presence,  have  asked  all  things  of  Me  in  person, 
and  I have  gained  them  from  My  Father.  But  now,  as  I am  about 
to  leave  you,  I refer  you  to  My  Father,  that  ye  may  obtain  from 
him  all  that  ye  require,  through  the  intervention  of  My  Name.  For 
though  the  Apostles  cast  out  devils,  &c.,  in  Chrises  Name,  yet  they 
did  so  by  asking  help  from  Him  who  was  present  with  them. 

Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive . Because  I have  obtained  this  from  the 
Father  by  My  merits.  Be  not  sorrowful  at  My  departure,  for  He 
will  give  you  greater  things  than  I have  ever  given,  if  invoked  in 
My  Name.  So  Euthymius,  Maldonatus,  &c. 

That  your  joy  may  be  full,  (1.)  S.  Augustine  (in  loc.)  explains 
thus,  “ Ask  of  God  to  comfort  you  in  My  absence,  and  to  confer  on 
you  fulness  of  joy  in  eternal  happiness.”  (2.)  S.  Cyril.  If  ye  ask 
of  God,  He  will  give  you  the  fulness  of  joy,  namely,  remission 
of  sins  and  plenteous  grace.  (3.)  The  word  “that”  signifies  the 
effect  and  result  of  your  prayers.  Ye  will  rejoice  at  My  Resurrection, 
but  in  order  to  perfect  your  joy,  ask  of  the  Father  in  My  Name  all 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


i8o 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XVI. 


the  graces  ye  need,  so  that  by  obtaining  them  from  the  Father  ye 
may  have  fulness  of  joy,  and  wish  for  nothing  more  in  this  life.  So 
Ribera,  Toletus,  Jansenius,  and  others.  This  is  the  true  meaning. 

Ver.  25. — These  things  have  1 spoken  to  you  in  proverbs  ; but  the 
time  cometh  when  I shall  no  longer  speak  unto  you  in  proverbs , but 
shall  show  you  plainly  of  the  Father . I said  (Preface  to  Prov.)  that 
a proverb,  parable,  and  adage  often  meant  the  same  thing,  viz., 
some  occult,  obscure,  and  mysterious  saying,  though  it  does  not 
contain  a parable.  This  is  the  meaning  here.  What  I have  said 
about  “a  little  while,”  “the  Holy  Spirit,”  “My  departure  to  thfe 
Father,”  “ your  joy,”  &c.,  seems  to  you  now  obscure  and  enigmatical. 
But  you  will  soon  have  full  experience  of  them,  both  by  My  own 
teaching  in  the  forty  days,  when  I shall  make  known  to  you  the 
meaning  of  Holy  Scripture  (Acts  i.  3),  and  more  fully  by  the  Holy 
Spirit,  whom  I will  send  to  you  at  Pentecost,  to  teach  you  clearly 
and  distinctly  the  mysteries  of  the  faith,  and  to  inflame  you  with 
the  love  of  them.  So  S.  Augustine,  Bede,  Maldonatus,  and  others. 
S.  Gregory  ( Moral  xxx.  5)  refers  this  promise  to  the  state  of 
blessedness  in  heaven,  for  there  it  will  be  most  abundantly  fulfilled, 
when  we  shall  see  God  face  to  face. 

Ver.  26. — In  that  day  ye  shall  ask  in  My  Name ; and  I say  not 
unto  you  that  I shall  pray  the  Father  for  you . I said  (xiv.  16),  “ I 
will  pray  the  Father,  and  He  shall  give  you  another  Comforter.” 
But  now  there  will  be  no  need  of  My  praying,  for  I shall  soon  send 
the  Holy  Spirit,  who  will  teach  you  to  pray  to  God  in  My  Name 
with  such  great  earnestness,  that  the  Father  will  grant  you  all  things 
at  your  prayer,  and  therefore  ye  will  not  then  need  such  prayers  as 
I offered  to  God  when  present  with  you.  Hence  some  Fathers 
think  that  Christ  does  not  pray  for  us  in  Heaven  with  prayers, 
properly  so  called,  but  merely  by  presenting  His  wounds  to  the 
Father.  (See  Vasquez,  par  «/.,  tome  1,  Queest.  21).  But  it  is  more 
probable  that  Christ  does  pray  for  us  in  heaven  with  prayers  properly 
so  called,  as  I have  explained  in  Rom.  viii.  24.  Christ  means  that 
His  earthly  presence  was  not  needed  in  order  to  pray  for  them  as 
He  used  to  do. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


WHY  GOD  REQUIRES  US  TO  PRAY.  l8l 

Ver.  27. — For  the  Father  Himself  loveth  you , because  ye  have  loved 
Me,  He  first  loveth  us,  in  calling  and  urging  us  sinners  to  repent- 
ance and  love  of  Him.  And  we  then  begin  to  love  Him,  and  He 
then  pours  into  us  charity  and  justifying  grace,  making  us  His 
sons  and  friends.  Hence  it  is  clear  that  charity  is  the  bond  between 
God  and  man,  for  it  causes  us  to  love  God,  and  God  in  turn  to  love 
us,  as  a friend  loves  a friend  and  is  loved  by  him  in  return. 

And  have  believed  that  I came  forth  from  God:  that  is,  that  I am 
the  Son  of  God,  sent  by  Him  into  the  world  for  your  and  others* 
salvation.  But  you  will  say  : “ If  God  loves  us,  why  does  not  He 
give  of  His  own  accord  those  things  He  knows  we  need,  but  wishes 
to  be  asked ?”  (1.)  Because  the  reverend  Majesty  of  God  demands 
of  us  that  we  should  reverence  Him  by  our  prayers,  and  testify  that 
we  need  His  bounty,  and  that  no  one  can  relieve  our  wants  but 
Himself.  We  owe  to  Him  the  tribute  of  our  prayers. 

(2.)  The  state  of  man  requires  us  to  acknowledge  that  we  depend 
on  Him,  are  fostered  and  protected  by  Him,  and  that  in  all  things 
we  need  His  aid  and  bounty.  “ Nay,  let  him  openly  confess,”  says 
S.  Augustine,  “that  he  is  God’s  mendicant.  Let  him  humble  him- 
self before  Him,  and  with  bended  neck  beg  from  Him  what  he 
needs.” 

(3.)  The  greatness  of  the  thing  asked  for  demands  it.  For  we 
ask  of  God  grace  and  glory,  and  there  is  nothing  more  excellent 
than  these.  God  wishes  us  therefore  to  buy  them  by  prayer,  as  it 
were  by  a price,  that  we  may  value  them  the  more,  and  carefully 
preserve  them.  See  S.  Basil  ( Conat '.  Monast . chap,  ii.) 

(4.)  The  utility  and  the  excellence  of  prayer  demands  it  For 
therein  we  exercise,  1.  Faith,  in  believing  that  God  is  Almighty, 
All-wise,  and  Most  Good.  2.  Hope,  for  we  hope  that  He  will  give 
us  all  things  necessary  for  this  life  and  the  next.  3.  Love,  whereby 
we  as  children  ask  all  these  things  from  a most  loving  Father.  S. 
Chrysostom  says  thus  on  Ps.  iv.,  “ Prayer  is  no  slight  bond  of  our 
love  towards  God : for  it  accustoms  us  to  speak  to  Him,  and  leads 
us  on  to  the  study  of  wisdom.  For  if  he  who  holds  much  converse 
with  some  great  and  wonderful  man,  gains  thereby  great  benefit, 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XVI. 


182 

how  much  more  does  he  who  holds  perpetual  converse  with  God  ? ” 
For  “prayer”  (as  he  says  elsewhere)  “is  a talking  with  God,  which 
makes  man  a kind  of  familiar  angel  with  God.”  See  his  book  “ De 
orando  Deum,”  and  Climacus  (gradu  xxviii),  where  he  gives  many 
excellent  testimonies  in  favour  of  prayer,  and  adds,  “ Prayer  is  a kind 
of  holy  tyranny  over  God,”  for  it  compels  Him,  as  it  were,  to  grant 
those  things  which  are  asked  for. 

Ver.  28. — I came  forth  from  the  Father , and  am  come  into  the 
world.  Again  1 leave  the  world  and  go  to  the  Father.  I came 
forth,  not  by  birth  of  the  Virgin,  as  Jansen  maintains,  but  by  My 
Eternal  Generation  from  the  Father.  So  say  the  Fathers.  Listen 
to  S.  Augustine  (in  loc .),  “ He  came  forth  from  the  Father,  because 
He  is  of  the  Father,  and  He  came  into  the  world,  because  He  showed 
to  the  world  the  Body  which  He  took  of  the  Virgin.”  And  Cyril, 
“To  have  come  forth  from  the  Father,  is  nothing  else  than  to  have 
been  bom,  and  to  have  shone  forth  from  the  Substance  of  the 
Father  by  that  going  forth  by  which  He  is,  and  is  thus  understood 
to  be  as  in  proper  subsistence.”  Euthymius,  “ I came  forth  from 
the  Father,  signifies  that  He  is  of  the  Substance  of  the  Father,  or 
by  every  right  the  Son  of  the  Father.”  So  also  Bede,  S.  Thomas, 
Lyranus,  Ribera,  Toletus,  and  others.  This  will  be  more  clear 
from  verse  30.  And  so,  too,  it  is  said  “ they  came  forth  from  the 
loins  of  their  father”  (Heb.  vii.  10;  and  Is.  xxxix.  7).  To  go 
forth  from  the  Father  is  the  same  as  being  begotten  of  Him. 

Ver.  29. — His  disciples  say  unto  Him , Lo , now  speakest  thou  plainly , 
and  speakest  no  proverb:  we  now  clearly  understand  that  which 
we  did  not  comprehend  before.  For  Thou  spakest  obscurely,  “ A 
little  while,  and  ye  shall  not  see  Me,”  &c.  But  now  thou  explainest 
it  clearly. 

Ver.  30. — Now  we  know  that  Thou  knowest  all  things . “ From  our 
seeing  and  hearing  that  Thou  understandest  our  secret  thoughts, 
our  doubts,  and  our  desires  to  understand  the  meaning  of  Thy 
words,  for  Thou  hast  anticipated  our  questionings,  and  hast  of 
Thine  own  accord  cleared  up  our  doubts.  And  for  this  cause  we 
believe  the  more  firmly  that  Thou  art  in  truth  the  Son  of  God,  and 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


OVERCOMING  THE  WORLD. 


183 


begotten  by  Him,  because  Thou  knowest  all  things,  and  seest  the 
secrets  of  hearts;  which  is  the  property  of  God.,,  So  Cyril;  or  as 
Toletus  says,  “ This  alone  is  sufficient  to  make  us  believe  that  Thou 
earnest  forth  from  God,  because  Thou  disco verest  our  secret 
thoughts,  and  makest  answer  to  them.  And  if  other  arguments 
(many  as  they  are)  were  wanting,  this  alone  would  suffice  to  make 
us  believe  in  Thee.” 

Ver.  31. — Jesus  answered  them , Do  ye  now  believe  ? Ver.  32. — 
Behold  the  hour  cometh  ; yea , is  now  come,  that  ye  shall  be  scattered 
every  man  to  his  own , and  shall  leave  Me  alone  ; and  yet  1 am  not 
alone,  because  the  Father  is  with  Me . This  first  clause  is  read  either 
as  a question  (with  Theophylact,  Euthymius,  Jansenius,  and  others) 
or  as  an  affirmation.  The  meaning  is  the  same  in  either  case. 
Do  ye  believe?  But  ye  will  soon  show  how  little  and  feeble  is 
your  faith.  Or  else,  Ye  now  have  faith  in  Me,  but  much  feebler  than 
you  think,  for  you  will  flee  away,  and  leave  Me.  Each  of  you 
hasting  away  to  the  place  which  is  nearest,  and  none  of  you  waiting 
for  any  others. 

I am  not  alone . I say  not  this  for  My  own  sake,  but  for  your  sake. 
I need  not  your  protection,  as  I have  the  Almighty  Father  with  Me. 

Ver.  33. — These  things  have  I spoken  unto  you,  that  in  Me  ye  might 
have  peace . The  things  I said  before  (ver.  5,  and  ch.  xvi.  18  and  19). 
That  ye  might  trust  confidently  in  Me,  with  a mind  calm  and  tran- 
quil, unmoved,  and  unterrified  by  the  waves  of  persecution. 

In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation , but  be  of  good  cheer , I have 
overcome  the  world . I have  begun  to  overcome  it,  by  My  holy  Life 
and  heavenly  doctrines,  but  I will  now  fully  and  completely  over- 
come it  by  My  Passion  and  Death.  Be  confident  then,  that  as  I 
have  overcome  it,  so  will  ye  overcome  it  if  ye  persevere  in  faith  and 
love.  If  therefore  ye  abide  in  Me,  ye  also,  by  My  example,  and  by 
the  grace  of  tlje  Holy  Spirit,  which  I will  give  you,  will  overcome 
the  world ; i.e.y  all  the  hatred,  persecutions,  &c.,  of  the  Jews  (see 
1 John  v.)  Understand  by  the  world,  the  prince  of  the  world,  and 
all  other  adversaries  of  Christ.  So  Toletus,  Ribera,  and  others.  Be 
assured  then,  under  every  worldly  trial,  that  I have  overcome  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1 84 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XVI. 


world,  not  for  Myself  but  for  your  sakes  I have  overcome,  that  ye  might 
overcome,  that  I might  give  you  a rule  and  pattern,  that  I might  obtain 
from  God  the  grace  of  victory  for  you.  Contend  therefore  resolutely, 
because  I will  contend  in  you,  and  overcome  in  you,  by  making  you 
conquerors.  For,  as  S.  Augustine  says  here,  He  would  not  have 
overcome  the  world,  if  the  world  were  to  conquer  His  members. 

Montanus,  and  his  fellow-martyrs,  the  disciples  ot  S.  Cyprian, 
trusting  in  these  words  were  strengthened  by  them,  and  exulted  in 
their  dark  and  gloomy  prison ; for  they  said,  “ Where  the  tempta- 
tion is  great,  there  is  He,  the  Greater  One,  who  overcomes  it  in  us,  and 
there  is  no  contest  in  which,  by  the  protection  of  the  Lord,  there  is 
not  victory.”  See  their  Acts  in  Surius,  Feb.  24.  And  S.  Cyprian  him- 
self (Ep.  ad  Fortunatum)  says,  “If  any  one,  keeping  the  commands 
of  the  Lord,  and  boldly  cleaving  to  Christ,  has  stood  against  the 
adversary,  he  must  needs  be  conqueror,  for  Christ  is  unconquer- 
able.” Also  in  Epist.  to  Donatus,  “ He  can  seek  for  nothing  from 
the  world  who  is  above  the  world.”  And  again  (Epist.  to  people  of 
Thibaris),  e.g.  “The  Christian  soldier,  instructed  by  His  precepts  and 
warnings,  trembles  not  at  the  battle,  but  is  ready  for  the  Crown.” 
And  just  before,  “ The  Lord  wished  we  should  rejoice  in  persecutions, 
because  when  they  come,  then  the  crowns  of  faith  are  given,  the 
soldiers  of  God  are  proved,  the  heavens  are  opened  to  martyrs.” 
And  again,  “ He  is  not  alone,  whose  companion  in  flight  is  Christ, 
who  keeping  the  temple  of  God,  wherever  he  may  be,  is  not  without 
God.  And  should  a robber  assault  him  when  flying  in  solitude,  or 
on  the  mountains,  or  a wild  beast  attack,  or  hunger,  or  thirst,  or  cold 
afflict,  or  when  hastening  over  the  sea  storm  and  tempest  over- 
whelm him,  Christ  everywhere  beholdeth  His  soldier,  and  if  he  dies 
in  persecution  for  the  honour  of  His  name,  He  gives  Him  the  reward 
He  has  promised  He  will  give  in  the  resurrection.”  And  also  in  the 
Treatise  de  Mortals  “ He  who  is  a soldier  of  God,  who,  stationed 
in  the  heavenly  camp,  is  already  hoping  for  things  above,  should 
recognise  what  He  is,  in  order  that  there  may  not  be  any  trepida- 
tion or  faltering  in  us  at  the  storms  and  tempests  of  the  world. 
For  the  Lord  foretold  that  these  things  should  come  to  pass,  instruct- 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


CONTEMPT  OF  THE  WORLD.  1 85 

ing  and  teaching  us  beforehand  by  His  word  of  encouragement,  and 
preparing  and  strengthening  us  to  meet  them.”  And  he  says  (Epist. 
i.  ad  Cornelium) : “ That  the  soldiers  of  Christ  cannot  be  con- 

quered, though  they  can  die,  and  that  they  are  unconquered  because 
they  are  not  afraid  to  die.”  And  the  Confessors,  too,  who  were  in 
prison  and  destined  to  martyrdom,  wrote  thus  touchingly  to  S. 
Cyprian,  as  the  encourager  of  Martyrs : — “ What  more  glorious  or 
what  more  happy  can  be  granted  to  any  man  by  Divine  favour,  than 
fearlessly  to  confess  the  Lord  God  in  the  midst  of  his  murderers, 
and  that  while  the  various  and  exquisite  torments  of  the  secular 
power  are  raging,  even  with  a racked,  tortured,  and  mangled  body,  to 
confess  Christ  the  Son  of  God  with  his  departing  but  still  free 
spirit?  having  broken  through  all  worldly  hindrances,  to  present 
himself  before  God  freed  from  them  all, — than  to  win  the  heavenly 
kingdom  without  delay,  than  to  become  a fellow-sufferer  with  Christ 
by  suffering  in  His  Name?”  And  so  too  S.  Chrysostom,  when  his 
banishment  was  in  debate,  addressed  to  his  people  eleven  dis- 
courses, beginning  thus  : — “ Many  are  the  floods,  and  huge  the 
waves,  but  I fear  not  drowning,  for  I stand  on  the  rock.  But  what 
think  they  ? Lest  I should  fear  death,  to  whom  to  live  is  Christ 
and  to  die  is  gain  ? lest  I should  be  afraid  of  exile,  though  I know 
that  the  earth  is  the  Lord’s,  and  the  fulness  thereof?  or  the  proscrip- 
tion of  my  goods,  though  I know  that  I brought  nothing  into  the 
world,  neither  can  I take  anything  out  ? The  terrors  of  the  world — 
I despise  them ; its  pleasures — I deride  them.  I desire  not  riches, 
l dread  not  poverty,  I fear  not  death.” 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


( i8  6 ) 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

I  Christ , like  a most  loving  father  bidding  farnvell  to  his  children , after  His  long 
discourse  and  exhortation  to  His  Apostles , concludes  with  a prayer , in  which 
He  commends  and  gives  them  up  to  God \ He  prays  first  for  the  glorification 
of  Himself  and  the  Father . 9 For  the  care  and  salvation  of  His  disciples, 

20  For  all  those  who  would  afterwards  believe  in  Him  through  their  preachings 
that  God  would  keep  them  from  evil , that  they  might  all  be  one , and  the  world 
might  believe  that  He  was  sent  by  the  Father  to  save  the  world, 

THESE  words  spake  Jesus,  and  lifted  up  his  eyes  to  heaven,  and  said,  Father, 
the  hour  is  come  ; glorify  thy  Son,  that  thy  Son  also  may  glorify  thee  : 

2  As  thou  hast  given  him  power  over  all  flesh,  that  he  should  give  eternal  life 
to  as  many  as  thou  hast  given  him. 

3  And  this  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might  know  thee  the  only  true  God,  and 
Jesus  Christ,  whom  thou  hast  sent. 

4  I have  glorified  thee  on  the  earth  : I have  finished  the  work  which  thou 
gavest  me  to  do. 

5  And  now,  O Father,  glorify  thou  me  with  thine  own  self  with  the  glory 
which  I had  with  thee  before  the  world  was. 

6  I have  manifested  thy  name  unto  the  men  which  thou  gavest  me  out  of  the 
world  : thine  they  were,  and  thou  gavest  them  me  ; and  they  have  kept  thy  word. 

7  Now  they  have  known  that  all  things  whatsoever  thou  hast  given  me  are  of 
thee. 

8  For  I have  given  unto  them  the  words  which  thou  gavest  me  : and  they 
have  received  them,  and  have  known  surely  that  I came  out  from  thee,  and  they 
have  believed  that  thou  didst  send  me. 

9  I pray  for  them  : I pray  not  for  the  world,  but  for  them  which  thou  hast 
given  me  ; for  they  are  thine. 

IO  And  all  mine  are  thine,  and  thine  are  mine  ; and  I am  glorified  in  them. 

II  And  now  I am  no  more  in  the  world,  but  these  are  in  the  world,  and  I 
come  to  thee.  Holy  Father,  keep  through  thine  own  name  those  whom  thou 
hast  given  me,  that  they  may  be  one,  as  we  are. 

12  While  I was  with  them  in  the  world,  I kept  them  in  thy  name  : those  that 
thou  gavest  me  I have  kept,  and  none  of  them  is  lost,  but  the  son  of  perdition  ; 
that  the  scripture  might  be  fulfilled. 

13  And  now  come  I to  thee  ; and  these  things  I speak  in  the  world,  that  they 
might  have  my  joy  fulfilled  in  themselves. 

14  I have  given  them  thy  word  ; and  the  world  hath  hated  them,  because  they 
are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  I am  not  of  the  world. 

15  I pray  not  that  thou  shouldst  take  them  out  of  the  world,  but  that  thou 
shouldst  keep  them  from  the  evil 


Digitized  by 


Google 


GLORIFYING  CHRIST. 


187 


16  They  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  I am  not  of  the  world. 

17  Sanctify  them  through  thy  truth  : thy  word  is  truth. 

18  As  thou  hast  sent  me  into  the  world,  even  so  have  I also  sent  them  into  the 
world. 

19  And  for  their  sakes  I sanctify  myself,  that  they  also  might  be  sanctified 
through  the  truth. 

20  Neither  pray  I for  these  alone,  but  for  them  also  which  shall  believe  on  me 
through  their  word  ; 

21  That  they  all  may  be  one ; as  thou,  Father,  art  in  me,  and  I in  thee,  that 
they  also  may  be  one  in  us  : that  the  world  may  believe  that  thou  hast  sent  me. 

22  And  the  glory  which  thou  gavest  me  I have  given  them  ; that  they  may  be 
one,  even  as  we  are  one  : 

23  I in  them,  and  thou  in  me,  that  they  may  be  made  perfect  in  one ; and 
that  the  world  may  know  that  thou  hast  sent  me,  and  hast  loved  them  as  thou 
hast  loved  me. 

24  Father,  I will  that  they  also,  whom  thou  hast  given  me,  be  with  me  where 
I am  ; that  they  may  behold  my  glory,  which  thou  hast  given  me  : for  thou 
lovedst  me  before  the  foundation  of  the  world. 

25  O righteous  Father,  the  world  hath  not  known  thee  : but  I have  known 
thee,  and  these  have  known  that  thou  hast  sent  me. 

26  And  I have  declared  unto  them  thy  name,  and  will  declare  it : that  the  love 
wherewith  thou  hast  loved  me  may  be  in  them,  and  I in  them. 

Ver.  1. — These  words  spake  Jesus,  and  lifted  up  His  eyes  to  heaven 
and  said , Father , the  hour  is  come  : glorify  Thy  Son , that  Thy  Son  also 
may  glorify  Thee,  These  are  the  last  words  of  Christ,  when  going 
to  His  Passion,  and  like  the  dying  notes  of  the  swan,  are  full  of  sweet- 
ness, love,  and  warmth.  He  teaches  us  (1.),  when  trouble  is  pressing 
on,  to  have  recourse  to  prayer,  and  to  ask  God  for  strength  to 
overcome  it.  (2.)  That  fathers  both  earthly  and  spiritual  should, 
when  going  away  or  dying,  commend  their  children  to  God  in 
prayer.  (3.)  That  preachers  should  study  their  discourses,  so  as 
to  obtain  both  such  power  of  speech  as  to  move  the  hearts  of  their 
hearers,  and  so  as  to  gain  acceptance  with  them,  that  they  may 
understand  what  they  hear,  and  lovingly  carry  it  out  in  their  lives. 
“But  no  vain  waste  of  words  may  have  a place,”  says  S.  Cyril, 
xl  14. 

Lifted  up  His  eyes . — To  teach  us,  by  using  the  same  gesture,  to  lift 
up  our  heart  to  God. 

Each  word  has  its  force.  “Father.”  Christ  prays  as  man,  but  as 
God-man : hypostatically  united  to  God.  He  therefore  calls  God  His 
Father,  because  He  begat  the  Son  as  God,  and  hypostatically  united 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XVII. 


1 88 

to  Him  man’s  nature  (hominem)  which  He  assumed  The  Name  of 
Father  invites  to  confidence  and  love ; for  what  can  a father  deny 
his  son  ? It  also  indicates  majesty  and  power ; for  as  S.  Cyril  says 
( Thesaur  i.  6),  “It  is  in  God  a greater  thing  to  be  the  Father  than 
to  be  Lord  Because  as  the  Father  He  begat  His  consubstantial 
Son,  but  as  Lord  He  made  the  creatures,  who  are  infinitely  inferior 
to  Him.” 

Is  come. — In  the  Greek  it  is  in  the  past  tense.  It  is,  that  is,  the 
fitting  time,  almost  the  last  hour  of  my  liberty  and  life.  My  seizure, 
My  passion,  My  cup  and  death  are  at  hand,  when  I shall  specially 
need,  O Father,  Thy  grace  and  help.  For  then  will  My  Godhead  be 
especially  hid,  when  I shall  be  nailed  to  the  Cross,  as  a seditious 
person,  and  as  aiming  at  being  King  of  the  Jews.  I therefore  pray 
Thee  to  wipe  away  this  infamy,  to  manifest  My  Godhead  and  glorify 
Me.  S.  Augustine  says  (in  loc.),  “This  denotes  that  all  time,  and 
that  what  He  would  do  at  any  time,  or  allow  to  be  done,  were  all 
ordered  by  Him,  who  is  not  subject  to  time.  The  hour  is  come,  not 
by  the  force  of  destiny,  but  by  God’s  ordering.  Be  it  far  from  our 
thought  that  the  stars  should  compel  the  Maker  of  the  stars  to  die.” 

Glorify  Thy  Son . — But  what  glory  and  glorification  does  Christ 
here  ask  for?  (i.)  Some  understand  His  Passion  and  death;  this 
indeed  was  great  glory  to  Christ  For  by  it  He  reconciled  men  to 
God,  He  abolished  sin,  He  overcame  the  devil,  He  destroyed  death, 
He  procured  for  us  life  and  glory.  So  Origen,  Horn.  6 in  Exod. ; 
S.  Ambrose,  Hexam.  iv.  2 ; S.  Hilary,  Lib.  iii.  de  Trinit.,  who  says, 
“ He  was  to  be  spit  upon,  to  be  scourged,  to  be  crucified.  But  the 
Father  glorifies  Him  by  the  sun  withdrawing  its  light,  by  the  earth 
trembling,  by  the  witness  of  the  Centurioa”  The  cross  therefore 
was  in  itself  a dishonour  to  Christ,  but  in  its  fruits  it  was  glorious. 

(2.)  S.  Augustine  (in  loc.)  and  Ribera  consider  that  this  glorifying 
of  Christ  was  in  His  resurrection,  ascension,  His  being  seated  at  the 
Right  Hand  of  the  Father,  and  His  sending  the  Holy  Spirit.  I 
offer  Myself  (He  would  say)  to  an  ignominious  death  for  Thy  glory, 
and  for  the  salvation  of  men,  whom  Thou  hast  chosen  from  all 
eternity.  Do  Thou  glorify  Me,  that  in  My  Passion  I may  appear  as 


Digitized  by 


Google 


GLORIFYING  CHRIST.  1 89 

thy  true  Son ; and  afterwards  rise  again  and  ascend  into  heaven ; that 
men,  for  whom  I die,  may  thus  believe  in  Me,  that  Thy  Godhead, 
power,  and  goodness  may  be  acknowledged,  and  that  Thou  mayest 
be  adored  by  all.  Hear  S.  Augustine : “ If  He  is  glorified  in  His 
Passion,  how  much  more  in  His  Resurrection  ? He  says  therefore, 
the  hour  is  come  for  sowing  in  humility,  delay  not  Thou  the  fruit 
thereof  in  glory.”  (3.)  More  correctly,  and  to  the  point  This  glory 
was  the  manifestation  of  Christ,  to  be  the  Son  of  God.  This  was 
the  end  and  scope  of  His  Incarnation,  as  He  explains  in  the  next 
verse,  and  so  its  meaning  is,  " Thou  hast  sent  Thy  Son  into  the 
world  to  redeem  it.  My  Passion,  whereby  many  will  be  offended 
and  fall  from  Me,  is  at  hand.  I pray  Thee,  O Father,  to  glorify  Me, 
that  men  may  not  contemn  and  despise  Me  for  My  death  on  the 
cross,  but  may  acknowledge  Me  as  Thy  Son,  and  Very  God,  and 
thereby  obtain  grace,  righteousness,  and  salvation.”  Christ  asks  that 
this  purpose  of  God  may  be  manifested  to  the  world,  to  the  end 
that  this  His  mighty  work  may  attain  its  end  and  object.  Glorify 
Me  then  by  miracles,  the  earthquake,  the  rending  of  the  veil,  the 
opening  of  the  tombs,  &c.,  by  My  speedy  Resurrection,  by  My 
Ascension,  the  conversion  of  the  whole  world,  that  all  may  recognise 
Me  as  God,  and  the  Saviour  of  the  world. 

It  is  clear  then  that  all  these  three  interpretations  come  to  the 
same  point.  Glory  and  distinction  mean  the  same  thing,  as  is  shown 
by  many  heathen  authorities.  It  is  also  plain  that  this  glorification 
properly  relates  to  Christ’s  manhood,  and  that  it  should  be  acknow- 
ledged as  united  to  the  Godhead.  Consequently  it  is  an  acknowledg- 
ment of  His  Godhead.  For  by  its  being  made  known  to  the  world 
that  Christ’s  manhood  was  united  to  the  Godhead,  it  was  made 
known  also  that  God  of  His  boundless  mercy  humbled  Himself  to 
be  born,  and  to  die  for  us  from  His  supreme  love  for  maa 

Arius  used  to  object.  The  Son  seeks  to  be  glorified  by  the 
Father,  therefore  the  Father  is  greater  than  the  Son.  S.  Basil 
retorts  by  quoting  the  words  which  follow,  “That  Thy  Son  also 
may  glorify  Thee.”  The  Son  therefore  glorifies  the  Father  quite  as 
much  as  the  Father  glorifies  the  Son.  Morally,  Christ  teaches  us 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


190 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XVII. 


here,  that  God  turns  into  glory  any  ignominy  which  has  been 
incurred  for  His  name,  and  that  the  greater  the  ignominy,  so  much 
greater  is  the  glory.  And  that  ignominy  is  the  true  way  to  glory, 
according  to  the  Apostle's  words  (Phil.  ii.  7,  seq.) 

And  in  like  manner,  SS.  Peter  and  Paul,  having  been  evilly 
entreated  and  put  to  death  by  Nero,  attained  to  the  highest  glory, 
so  as  to  be  lords  not  only  of  Rome  but  also  of  the  whole  world,  and 
to  have  had  their  statues  placed  on  the  columns  of  Trajan  and 
Antonine,  in  the  place  of  these  two  Emperors. 

The  Gentiles  had  some  faint  notion  of  this.  As  Agesilaus  said 
that  the  way  to  obtain  undying  glory  was  to  despise  death.  And 
so  also  Alexander,  Julius  Caesar,  and  many  others,  gained  their 
renown  in  war  by  despising  death  (see  Horatius>  Carm . i.  1 2). 

Hence  the  Spaniards  have  an  axiom  to  the  same  effect. 

Apostolic  men  should  be  more  ready  to  say  the  same,  for  what  is 
earthly  glory  to  heavenly,  human  to  divine,  temporal  to  eternal? 
See  Rom.  viii.  18.  And  the  Apostle  speaks  elsewhere  of  the  eternal 
weight  of  glory : For  the  Holy  Trinity,  all  the  countless  angels,  all 
the  hosts  of  the  blessed  prophets,  apostles,  martyrs,  confessors  will 
glorify  through  all  eternity  the  champions  of  virtue. 

That  Thy  Son  also  may  glorify  Thee . — By  showing  that  I am  not 
a mere  man,  but  the  God-man,  sent  by  Thee  for  the  salvation  of 
man.  And  I ask  this,  not  for  Myself,  as  being  greedy  of  glory,  but 
that  it  may  come  back  to  Thee,  as  the  Fount  and  Author  of  all 
My  glory,  that  so  I may  in  turn  glorify  Thee  by  making  Thee 
known  to  the  whole  world.  Christ  did  this  (1.)  “ Because  when  the 
Son  is  glorified  the  Father  is  glorified  also,"  says  S.  Cyril ; and  so 
also  S.  Hilary  {Lib.  iii.  de  Trinit.)  says,  “ He  shows  that  the  virtue  of 
the  Godhead  is  the  same  in  Both  ; for  the  glory  of  the  Son  is  the 
glory  of  the  Father.”  (2.)  Because  when  this  great  mystery  of  godli- 
ness, viz.,  the  Incarnation  of  the  Word  and  by  it  the  salvation  and 
redemption  of  men,  was  made  known,  all  who  heard  and  believed  it 
praised  the  boundless  compassion,  wisdom,  and  omnipotence  of  God 
the  Father,  which  He  manifested  in  this  His  work.  (3.)  Christ 
especially  glorified  His  Father  by  the  living  voice  of  His  doctrine 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHRIST  GLORIFIES  THE  FATHER.  I9I 

and  preaching.  For  Christ  preached  the  mystery  of  the  Holy 
Trinity,  and  in  many  places  of  St  John  He  magnifies  God  the 
Father,  saying  that  He  was  sent  by  Him,  and  ascribing  to  Him 
everything  He  had  received.  Hear  S.  Augustine  (in  loc.\  “God 
was  known  in  Judea  only,  but  it  was  by  the  Gospel  of  Christ  that 
the  Father  was  made  known  to  the  Gentiles.  He  saith  therefore, 
Glorify  Thou  Me,  raise  Thou  Me  up,  that  through  Me  Thou  mayest 
be  made  known  to  all  the  world.” 

Note  the  word  “Thy  Son;”  for,  as  S.  Hilary  says  (Lib.  iii.  de 
Trinity  “There  are  many  sons,  but  He  was  the  proper , the  Very 
Son,  by  origin,  and  not  by  adoption,  in  truth  and  not  in  name,  by 
nativity  and  not  by  creation.” 

Ver.  2. — As  thou  hast  given  Him  power  over  all  flesh . Because 
Thou,  O Father,  hast  given  Me  power  over  all  men,  give  Me  also 
the  glory  which  is  necessary  for  its  exercise  and  proportionate  to  it, 
that,  as  My  Power  is  more  ample  over  all  men,  so  may  My  glory  be 
most  ample  and  be  spread  over  all  nations.  Just  as  a viceroy  says 
to  a king,  As  thou  hast  given  me  this  delegated  power,  give  me  also 
the  agents  and  means  which  are  necessary  to  sustain  it.  But  the 
power  of  Christ  is  over  all  men,  not  merely  as  He  is  God,  but  as  He 
is  man.  For  the  Father  hath  subjected  all  men  to  Christ  as  man, 
as  their  Prince  and  Saviour,  and  has  committed  them  all  to  His 
care  and  guidance  in  order  that  He  may,  as  far  as  possible,  labour 
to  save  them  all.  He  has  therefore  put  the  salvation  of  all  men 
into  His  hands.  “ All  flesh  ” then  means  that  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel  should  extend  to  the  whole  world,  says  S.  Chrysostom. 

That  He  should  give  eternal  life  to  as  many  as  thou  hast  given  Him . 
That  is,  that  I should  rightly  exercise  the  power  entrusted  to  me, 
viz.,  that  I should  bring  all  men,  as  far  as  lies  in  me,  to  eternal  life ; 
for  this  knowledge  of  My  glory,  which  is  faith  in  Me,  is  necessary  for 
their  attaining  salvation.  But  thou  wilt  say,  Christ  gives  not  eternal 
life  to  all  men  \ few  are  saved,  the  many  are  lost.  S.  Chrysostom  and 
Toletus  reply,  that  Christ,  for  His  part,  gives  eternal  life  to  all,  in 
giving  His  merits,  His  doctrine,  His  sacraments,  His  peace,  and  other 
means  of  salvation  to  all.  And  if  they  use  them  aright  they  will 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


192 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XVII. 


attain  to  eternal  life.  But  because  the  many  refuse  to  use  them,  it 
is  by  their  own  fault  that  more  are  lost  than  saved.  Jansen  adds 
that  Christ  more  especially  speaks  of  the  predestinate  only:  for 
those  did  the  Father  give  more  especially  to  Christ  (see  below , ver. 
1 6).  Christ  therefore  gives  His  elect  eternal  life  in  an  effectual 
manner,  but  to  the  reprobate  merely  sufficiently  so  that  these  may 
be  saved  possibly,  but  they  only  will  be  saved  actually. 

Ver.  3. — Bui  this  is  life  eternal , to  know  Thee  the  only  true  God  and 
Jesus  Christ  whom  Thou  hast  sent  This  saying  agrees  exactly  with 
what  precedes.  Christ  gives  the  reason  for  seeking  to  be  glorified. 
Because  this  glorification  is  the  knowledge  of  God  and  of  Christ, 
which  is  the  only  way  to  eternal  life.  His  argument  is  this,  “ Glorify 
Me,  that  I may  glorify  Thee,  so  that  by  this  glorifying  or  manifesta- 
tion they  may  attain  eternal  life.”  For  life  eternal  consists  in 
knowing  Thee,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  Thou  hast  sent,  in  order  that 
they  who  bdieve  in  Him  may  be  saved.  For  no  one  can  be  saved, 
except  by  Faith  in  Christ. 

This  is  life  eternal  (1.)  S.  Thomas  (Par.  i.  Qucest.  xiL  4 and  6, 
and  par.  iii.  Qucest . iii.  art.  4,  and  Contra  Gentes  iii.  cap.  61, 
and  elsewhere ),  understands  these  words  in  their  formal  sense,  and 
hence  proves  that  the  essence  of  beatitude  consists  in  an  act  of  the 
intellect,  not  of  the  will.  And  he  thus  explains  it,  “ Glorify  Me, 
that  thus  the  faithful  may  obtain  eternal  life,  which  consists  in 
knowledge,  i.e.  in  the  vision  of  the  Father  and  the  Son.”  (2.) 
Cajetan  and  Jansen  think  that  " knowledge  ” in  this  place,  is 
the  knowledge  both  of  the  way  and  of  the  country.  It  therefore 
does  not  mean  to  “ see  Thee,”  which  is  the  portion  of  the  Blessed, 
but  to  know  Thee,  which  belongs  to  those  who  are  but  on  the  way. 
For  eternal  life  begins  here  by  faith,  and  will  afterwards  be  con- 
summated in  sight.  (3.)  These  words  must  be  explained  literally  in 
a causal  sense.  “ This  is  life  eternal,  i.e.  this  is  the  cause  of,  the 
way  to  life  eternal,  to  believe  in  Thee  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus 
Christ  whom  thou  hast  sent.”  See  John  iii.  16,  vi.  47.  The  effect 
here  is  put  for  the  cause,  as  in  John  xi.  25  : I am  the  Resurrection 
and  the  Life,  i.e.  I am  the  causes  or  the  author  of  life,  and  also  xii. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


FAITH  THE  BEGINNING  OF  TIIE  BEATIFIC  VISION.  I93 

50 ; I know  that  His  commandment  is  eternal  life,  i.e.  the  cause  of 
it,  and  1 John  v.  4 and  S.  Cyril  (xi.  16)  affirm  that  faith  and  the 
practice  of  true  piety  are  the  root  and  origin  of  eternal  life.  Faith 
is  in  truth  the  beginning  of  the  Beatific  Vision.  For  it  produces  hope, 
hope  charity,  charity  good  works,  by  which  we  obtain  eternal  life. 

Lastly,  S.  Augustine  thus  combines  these  three  meanings,  “ If  the 
knowledge  of  God  is  life  eternal,  the  more  we  advance  in  this 
knowledge,  the  more  do  we  advance  in  eternal  life.  But  this  will 
be  perfect,  when  there  is  no  more  death.  There  will  then  be  the 
highest  glorifying  of  God,  because  there  will  be  the  highest  glory. 
But  glory  is  defined  thus,  as  the  frequent  speaking  of  a man  with 
praise.  But  if  a man  is  praised,  when  credit  is  given  to  what  is 
commonly  said  of  him,  how  shall  not  God  be  praised,  when  He  is 
beheld  ? ‘ Blessed  are  they  that  dwell  in  Thy  house : they  will  for 
ever  praise  Thee  * ” (Ps.  lxxxiv.  4). 

That  they  may  know  Thee,  the  only  true  God.  Hence  the  Arians 
infer  that  Christ  is  not  true  God.  In  reply,  (1.)  S.  Augustine 
(in  loc.),  Bede,  and  others,  connect  together  Jesus  Christ  and  the 
Father  under  the  one  term  H Deity, ” and  interpret  thus,  As 
the  Father  is  true  God,  so  is  the  Son  also  true  God.  ( See  S. 
Hil.  lib.  ix.  de  Isaiah.)  The  statement  would  otherwise  be 
imperfect,  for  if  we  believed  that  the  Father  alone  was  true  God, 
we  could  not  have  anything  else  to  say  about  Jesus  Christ,  unless 
we  understood  that  He  was  true  God  also.  The  Fathers,  in  fact,  infer 
from  this  Christ’s  Godhead.  (2.)  S.  Chrysostom,  Cyril,  and  others 
reply  that  the  word  “ only  ” does  not  exclude  the  Son  and  the  Holy 
Spirit,  but  merely  idols  and  false  gods.  And  the  meaning  is  that 
they  may  believe  in  Thee,  who  art  that  God,  who  only  is  the  true 
God,  as  is  also  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit  That  the  Son  is  true 
God  is  sufficiently  indicated,  when  it  is  said  that  eternal  life  consists 
in  the  knowledge  of  Him  and  of  the  Father  alike.  For  eternal  life 
necessarily  consists  in  (the  knowledge  of)  the  one  supreme  and  true 
God.  (See  S Ambrose  de  Fide , v.  2.)  Christ  therefore  through 
modesty  does  not  call  Himself  God,  but  one  sent  by  the  Father,  as 

the  Redeemer  of  the  world.  For  such  He  was  when  Incarnate,  and 

VOL.  V.  N 


Digitized  by  LnOOTLe 


194  S.  JOHN,  C.  XVII. 

made  man.  And  hence  we  infer  that  faith  in  the  Incarnation  and  the 
Trinity  is  required  in  order  to  salvation.  For  the  Father  cannot  be 
fully  believed  in,  apart  from  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  for  the 
Paternity  of  the  Father  requires  also  the  breathing  forth  of  the 
Holy  Spirit 

And  Jesus  Christ \ Whom  Thou  hast  sent.  Thou  wilt  say  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  here  omitted,  and  accordingly  He  is  not  God.  But  the 
word  “only”  merely  excludes  the  gods  of  the  heathen,  who  have 
another  nature,  and  not  the  Holy  Spirit,  Who  has  the  same  nature  as 
the  Father. 

But  why  is  the  Son  alone  mentioned,  and  not  the  Holy  Spirit  ? (i.) 
Euthymius  replies,  Because  the  time  for  speaking  about  Him  had 
not  arrived.  But  Christ  had  already  promised  the  Holy  Spirit  to 
His  disciples,  and  said  a great  deal  about  Him.  (2.)  Ribera  thinks 
that  it  was  in  order  to  maintain  the  greatness  of  His  origin,  and 
just  as  the  Son  attributes  everything  to  the  Father,  as  proceed- 
ing from  Him,  so  likewise  eternal  life  is  ascribed  to  our  knowing 
the  Father  and  the  Son.  And  though  the  Holy  Spirit  is  understood, 
yet  He  is  not  named,  because  the  Father  and  the  Son  are  the 
source  of  His  being,  whereas  He  is  not  the  source  of  any  Divine 
Person,  but  derived  everything  from  the  Father  and  the  Son.  See 
above,  chap.  xv.  26.  (3.)  Christ  does  not  mention  the  Holy  Spirit, 
because  He  was  wholly  engaged  in  enforcing  faith  in  Himself,  as 
God  and  man.  And  this  specially  needed  to  be  inculcated,  both 
because  it  was  a new  doctrine,  and  difficult  of  belief,  and  also 
because  it  was  the  basis  of  all  other  articles  of  belief,  and  more- 
over because  in  that  belief  was  involved  belief  in  the  Holy  Spirit,  of 
whom  Christ  had  already  spoken.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  therefore  here 
understood,  because,  as  S.  Augustine  says,  “ He  is  the  Spirit  of  the 
Father  and  of  the  Son,”  being  the  consubstantial  Love  of  them  Both. 

Ver.  4. — T have  glorified  Thee  on  the  earth  : I have  finished  the  work 
which  Thou  gavest  Me  to  do.  The  work  of  preaching  and  redemp- 
tion, for  which  Thou  didst  send  Me  into  the  world,  I shall  in  a few 
hours  consummate  after  the  brief  period  of  My  Passion  and  Death. 
And  I am  about  to  commit  the  teaching  thereof  to  the  Apostles. 


Digitized  by  Goo  2 


CHRIST'S  THREEFOLD  GLORY. 


195 


S.  Augustine  says,  “ I have  glorified  Thee  by  making  Thee  knows 
to  those  whom  Thou  hast  given  Me.  God  is  glorified  when  He  is 
made  known  to  men,  and  is  preached  to  those  who  believe  by 
faith.”  For,  as  S.  Chrysostom  says,  “ He  had  been  already  glorified 
and  adored  by  angels  in  heaven.  He  speaks  therefore  of  that  glory, 
which  concerns  the  worship  of  men.” 

Ver.  5. — And  {i.e.  therefore,  because  I have  performed  the  work  of 
My  mission),  O Father , glorify  Thou  Me  with  Thine  own  self  with 
the  glory  which  I had  with  Thee  before  the  world  was . S.  Augustine, 
and  after  him  S.  Thomas,  understand  it  of  the  glory  which  Christ 
had  as  man  from  all  eternity,  not  indeed  in  act,  but  in  the  decree 
and  predestination  of  God.  He  asks  “ that  the  glory  which  He  had 
in  predestination,  he  might  have  in  the  complete  restoration  of  it  to 
Him  at  the  ri^ht  hand  of  the  Father ; for  He  saw  that  the  time  for 
His  predestined  glorification  had  arrived.”  And  so  Suarez,  “ Glorify 
Thou  Me  with  the  glory  of  the  Resurrection,  to  which  Thou  didst 
predestinate  Me  before  the  world  was.” 

Others  understand  it  more  simply,  of  the  glory  which,  as  Son,  He 
had  from  the  Father,  in  sitting  at  His  right  hand,  as  equal  to  Him 
in  dignity  and  glory.  That  is,  Grant,  O Father,  that  I may,  after  My 
death,  ascend  into  heaven,  and  sit  at  Thy  right  hand  as  Thy  Son, 
and  so  be  glorified,  and  acknowledged  by  men  not  only  to  be  man 
but  also  God.  And  that  by  the  union  of  My  divine  nature  to  My 
manhood,  that  manhood  also  may  be  exalted  in  great  glory  to  Thy 
right  hand.  That  thus  My  Godhead  may  communicate  to  My  man- 
hood which  is  conjoined  with  it  the  glory  which  It  had  from  all 
eternity.  He  asks  therefore  that  the  Godhead  which  was  latent  in 
His  humanity  might  be  acknowledged,  and  that  both  might  be 
glorified  together.  So  S.  Chrysostom,  Cyril,  Theophylact,  Euthy- 
mius,  S.  Thomas.  Place  Me  at  Thy  right  hand,  that  all  may  under- 
stand that  I have  that  glory  which  in  truth  I had  with  Thee  from  all 
eternity,  and  that  I am  Thy  very  Son  by  nature,  and  equal  to  Thee. 
So  Cyril  (Hil.  lib.  iii.  de  Trin .),  S.  Augustine,  Leontius,  Toletus, 
and  many  others. 

A threefold  glory  of  Christ  is  here  signified.  First : The  uncreate 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XVII. 


I96 

and  uncreated  glory  of  His  Godhead  and  divine  Sonship.  Secondly, 
the  created  and  finite  glory  of  His  manhood,  which  it  obtained  by 
the  Resurrection  and  all  its  glorious  gifts,  and  afterwards  by  His 
Ascension.  For  He  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  not  as  God 
only,  but  as  man.  And  His  prayer  is,  Grant  that  I,  who  hjve  sat 
from  all  eternity  at  Thy  right  hand  as  God,  may  sit  there  also  as 
man.  The  third  glory  is  that  by  which  both  these  former  glories 
were  manifested  to  the  Apostles  and  the  rest  of  the  faithful,  for 
when  they  saw  Him  gloriously  ascending  into  heaven,  the  angels 
welcoming  Him,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  sent  down  by  Him  with  the 
working  of  so  many  signs  and  miracles,  by  which  they  converted  the 
whole  world  to  Christ,  from  all  this  they  acknowledged  that  Christ 
was  no  mere  man,  but  the  Son  of  God,  seated  as  such  at  the  right 
hand  of  the  Father  in  supreme  majesty  and  glory,  and  they  preached 
this  through  all  the  world.  Christ  therefore  asks  that  His  first  glory 
may  be  made  manifest  by  His  second,  i.e.  by  the  ascension  of  His 
manhood  into  heaven;  and  that  His  second  glory  may  be  mani- 
fested by  His  third  glory,  that  is,  to  the  Apostles  and  the  rest  of  the 
faithful.  He  asks,  in  short,  that  His  Godhead,  like  a heart  con- 
cealed by  the  mire  and  shell  of  His  manhood,  may  shine  forth 
(when  death  has  broken  that  shell)  and  diffuse  on  every  side  the 
rays  of  its  glory.  Just  as  the  sun  disperses  by  its  warmth  the 
clouds  which  envelop  it,  and  scatters  its  shining  rays  in  every 
direction.  And  when  that  comes  to  pass,  the  glory  of  Christ  will 
shine  forth  over  the  whole  world,  by  His  resurrection,  His  ascen- 
sion, His  sending  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  the  conversion  of  the 
Gentiles. 

S.  Chrysostom  by  His  glorification  understands  His  Passion,  and 
thus  addresses  Him,  “What  sayest  Thou?  When  Thou  art  about 
to  be  led  to  the  Cross  with  robbers  and  malefactors,  and  to  undergo 
the  death  of  the  accursed,  to  be  spit  upon,  to  be  beaten  with  rods 
and  blows ; callest  Thou  that  glory  ? Indeed  I do,  for  I shall  suffer 
all  this  for  those  I love,  &c.  If  then  He  counts  it  not  glory  to  be 
on  His  Father's  throne,  but  to  suffer  contumely,  how  much  more 
must  I reckon  that  to  be  glory  ? ” And  a little  before,  “ If  Christ 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


With  f iti&. 


*97 


counted  it  not  so  great  a thing  to  be  in  glory,  as  to  endure  the  Cross 
for  my  sake,  what,  I ask,  ought  I not  to  endure  for  His  Name?” 

Here  note  that  “ with  Thee  ” is  the  same  as  " from  Thee.”  For 
the  Son  derives  His  Godhead  and  all  His  glory  from  the  Father. 
Or  it  may  mean  “ In  Thy  presence,”  for  though  no  angel  or  man 
were  to  glorify  Christ,  yet  would  He  have  infinite  praise  and  glory 
in  the  Father’s  presence.  For  with  such  honours  the  Father  lauds 
and  glorifies  the  Son,  and  the  Son  in  turn  glorifies  the  Father.  And 
so  also  with  regard  to  the  Holy  Spirit.  Hence  we  sing  the 
Gloria  Patri  at  the  end  of  every  Psalm.  Indicating  the  glory  with 
which  Each  Divine  Person  glorifies  the  other  two,  and  is  in  turn 
glorified  by  Them.  3.  With  Thee  indicates  the  consubstantiality  of 
the  Father  and  the  Son.  See  John  i.  1,  and  notes. 

Therefore  some  heretics,  as  S.  Augustine  testifies,  wrongly  suppose 
that  this  glorifying  was  caused  by  the  manhood  in  heaven  being 
converted  into  the  Godhead.  This  is  impossible,  for  in  this  case 
the  manhood  of  Christ  which  suffered  would  not  be  glorified.  For 
it  would  no  longer  exist,  when  changed  into  the  Godhead.  There 
would  be  Godhead  only.  The  manhood  therefore  participates  in 
the  glory  of  the  Godhead  (far  above  all  angels  and  men),  as  being 
hypostatically  united  to  it.  Just  as  the  air  participates  in  the 
light  of  the  sun,  and  the  blessed  participate  in  the  glory  of  God. 
So  SS.  Chrysostom,  Hillary,  Ambrose,  and  Athanasius,  writing 
against  the  Arians. 

Ver.  6. — I have  manifested  Thy  Name  to  the  men  which  Thou  gavest 
Me  out  of  the  world . “This  was  the  duty  committed  to  Him  by  the 
Father.”  So  S.  Chrysostom.  “ Thy  name,  not  as  God,  but  as  the 
Father,”  says  S.  Cyril.  The  Interlin . Gloss  says  the  same;  and 
S.  Augustine  (in  loc.),  “For  the  Name  of  God  was  not  unknown 
to  the  Gentiles.  In  respect  that  He  made  the  world,  God  was 
known  to  all  men.  In  that  He  was  not  to  be  worshipped  together 
with  false  gods  He  was  known  in  Jewry.  But  in  that  He  is  the 
Father  of  Christ,  He  is  now  manifested  through  Christ”  And  S. 
Chrysostom,  “He  had  already  manifested  Himself  as  the  Son  of 
God  in  words  and  in  deeds.” 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


s.  John,  c.  Xvll. 


198 

Whom  Thou  gavest  Me  out  of  the  world.  By  calling,  and,  not 
merely  sufficient,  but  by  effectual,  grace  poured  on  those  whom 
Thou  hast  given  Me  perfectly  and  completely,  that  is,  as  concerns 
Myself,  even  those  who  were  called  by  such  preventing  grace,  as 
was  in  accordance  with  their  free  wills,  persuading  them  to  believe, 
love,  and  follow  Thee,  and  who  on  their  part  obeyed  My  call,  and 
separated  themselves  from  the  world,  its  desires  and  vanities.  As 
S.  Cecilia  said,  She  wished  to  have  no  friendship  with  the  world. 

He  speaks  more  particularly  of  the  Apostles ; and  He  signifies  by 
the  expression  “Thou  hast  given  Me,”  (1.)  That  the  power  and 
authority  He  had  over  His  disciples  and  other  men  was  derived 
from  His  Godhead.  (2.)  That  God  the  Father  by  His  preventing 
grace  had  moved  them  to  believe  in  Christ,  and  follow  Him.  (3.) 
That  the  Father  had  separated  them  from  the  world,  and  consigned 
them  to  Christ  (4.)  That  His  human  will  was  in  conformity  with 
the  will  of  the  Father.  (5.)  That  God  the  Father  chose  those 
whom  He  wished  to  consign  to  Christ  as  His  apostles,  and  that 
Christ  accepted  those  whom  He  had  chosen. 

Thine  they  were,  and  Thou  gavest  them  Me,  and  they  have  kept  Thy 
word.  Christ  gives  His  parting  blessing  to  His  disciples,  and 
commends  them  in  prayer  to  God.  He  prays  Him  to  protect  them 
as  His  own,  for  the  Father  had  given  them  to  Him. 

Ver.  7. — Noiu  they  have  known  that  all  things  Thou  hast  given  Me 
are  of  Thu.  All  that  I have  said  or  done  originally  came  from 
Thee,  My  teaching  and  My  law. 

Ver.  8. — For  I have  given  unto  them  the  words  which  Thou  gavest 
unto  Me,  and  they  have  received  them,  and  have  known  surely  that  I 
have  come  out  from  Thee,  and  have  believed  that  Thou  didst  send  Me. 
Have  a care  for  them,  because  I cared  for  and  taught  them,  and  they 
have  accepted  My  doctrine,  and  believed  Me  to  be  the  Messiah. 

Ver.  9. — I pray  for  them  (that  Thou  wouldst  make  them  grow  in 
the  knowledge  and  love  of  Thee  and  Me) : I pray  not  for  the  world, 
but  for  them  which  Thou  hast  given  Me;  for  they  are  Thine.  And 
hence  heretics  in  the  time  of  S.  Augustine  (making  a wrong  use  of 
his  writings)  taught  that  Christ  prayed  only  for  the  predestinate ; and 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


CHRIST  DIED  FOR  ALL. 


199 


that  therefore  whatever  sins  they  committed  could  not  hurt  them, 
and  that  no  good  works  could  be  of  avail  for  the  reprobate.  This 
heresy  was  renewed  by  John  Huss  and  Martin  Luther.  But  Scrip- 
ture teaches  us  that  Christ  was  born  and  died  for  all  men,  even  the 
reprobate,  or  rather  for  those  who  would  be  reprobated  on  account 
of  their  sins.  See  Luke  xxiii.  34;  2 Cor.  v.  14-15;  John  i.  9; 
1 Tim.  ii.  4.  Because  Christ,  for  His  part,  provides  all  men  with 
the  necessary  means  for  salvation.  His  sacraments  are  constituted 
for  all  His  Apostles  He  sent  to  all  nations.  He  offers  His  teach- 
ing and  His  grace  to  all.  He  has  sufficiently  done  His  part  for 
their  salvation.  But  He  here  specially  prays  for  His  faithful  ones, 
and  with  effectual  prayer,  for  God  to  keep  them  in  the  faith  and 
grace  which  have  been  given  them.  So  S.  Augustine,  who  elsewhere 
says,  I pray  not  for  those  who  are  likely  to  the  end  of  their  lives  to 
remain  (in)  the  world,  that  is,  to  continue  unbelieving  and  ungodly. 
(2.)  It  is  better,  and  more  to  the  point,  to  suppose  that  Christ  here 
prayed  for  the  Apostles  only.  For  after  He  had  prayed  for 
them,  He  prayed  for  those  who  would  afterwards  believe  through 
their  preaching  (verse  20).  He  therefore  did  not  pray  for  them. 
Nor  did  He  here  pray  for  the  world,  though  He  prayed  after- 
wards for  His  murderers.  And  by  the  power  of  that  prayer  many 
of  them  were  converted  at  the  preaching  of  S.  Peter.  But  in 
this  place  He  did  not  pray  for  them,  but,  as  I said,  only  for  the 
Apostles,  the  future  propagators  of  the  Gospel,  and  for  the  heads  of 
the  Church. 

Ver.  10. — And  all  Mine  are  Thine , and  Thine  are  Mine. 
I am  about  to  depart,  and  I commend  My  disciples  to  Thee ; 
because  they  are  Thine,  and  elected  by  Thee  to  eternal  life  and 
committed  to  My  care.  But  they  are  still  Thine,  though  given  to 
Me.  And  though,  as  I say,  they  were  given  to  Me,  yet  they  were 
ever  Mine ; for  all  Thou  hast  are  Mine,  by  reason  of  our  unity  of 
Essence.  So  SS.  Cyril  and  Chrysostom. 

And  I am  glorified  in  them.  Because  they  believe  in  Me,  love  Me, 
worship,  adore,  and  preae^i  Me  as  the  Messiah  and  the  Son  of  God 
So  Cyril  and  Chrysostom.  ^ 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


200 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XVII. 


Morally.  Learn  hence  that  God  and  Christ  are  glorified  in  us, 
when  we  do  what  is  right,  and  especially  when  we  preach  His  faith, 
and  convert  unbelievers  and  ungodly  men.  S.  Augustine  (in  I oc .) 
takes  it  otherwise,  putting  the  matter  as  past,  instead  of  its  being  yet 
to  come.  For  what  is  past  is  a matter  of  greater  certainty.  I 
pray  for  the  Apostles,  for  I am  about  to  be  glorified  by  them,  when 
they  preach  My  Godhead  in  all  the  world. 

Ver.  n. — And  now  I am  no  more  in  the  world  (I  shall  be  soon 
out  of  the  world),  but  these  are  in  the  worlds  and  1 come  to  Thee.  I 
am  leaving  the  world,  but  they  remain  in  it,  to  preach  the  gospel, 
and  therefore  will  be  exposed  to  the  hatred  of  both  Jews  and 
Gentiles,  and  countless  perils.  Keep  them,  then,  O Father,  for 
there  is  no  one  else  who  can  do  so,  in  My  absence. 

Holy  Father . He  terms  the  Father  “ Holy,”  because  He  is  speak- 
ing of  holiness,  and  He  prays  the  Father  to  keep  and  advance  the 
Apostles  in  holiness.  And  in  ver.  25  He  terms  Him  “righteous” 
for  withholding  from  the  unrighteous  and  proud  world  the  mysteries 
of  My  humiliation  in  redeeming  man.  And  when  consoling  S.  Paul 
in  tribulation,  He  is  called  " The  Father  of  mercies,  and  the  God  of 
all  consolation  ” (2  Cor.  i.  3).  And  when  He  strengthened  David  in 
battle,  and  made  him  victorious,  He  was  thus  addressed,  “I  will 
love  Thee,  O Lord,  My  strength  ” (Ps.  xviii.  1). 

Keep  through  Thine  Own  Name , by  Thy  might  and  omnipotence, 
that  they  may  ever  be  in  Me,  and  abide  in  My  love.  It  is  plain 
then  that  the  Apostles  had  not  lost  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
For  this  prayer  of  Christ’s  was  fully  heard  by  the  Father. 

That  they  may  be  one , as  We  are  one , i.e.  in  consent  and  will : just 
as  We  are  One  in  Nature,  and  the  same  Essential  Godhead.  That 
being  joined  together  by  one  spirit  of  charity,  they  may  ever  follow 
Me,  and  not  be  rent  asunder  by  discord,  and  thus  may  have  the 
unity  of  spirit  in  agreement,  which  we  have  by  means  of  the  same 
Essence.  So  S.  Augustine  (in  loc.)  and  S.  Ambrose  (de  Fide , iv.  2). 
Whence  S.  Cyril  notes  here,  and  S.  Athanasius  (contr.  Arian)  that 
the  word  “like”  signifies  only  a kind  of  resemblance,  but  not 
identity ; which  means  that  they,  by  the  consent  of  their  minds,  may 


Digitized  by 


201 


MEANING  OP  “THY  NAME/* 

imitate  that  unity  which  We  possess,  in  having  the  same  numerical 
essence  and  will. 

S.  Cyril  and  S.  Hilary  ( de  Trinit . lib.  viil)  refer  these  words  to 
the  Holy  Eucharist,  as  though  Christ  wished  that  the  Apostles,  by 
partaking  of  His  Body  therein,  might  become  one  with  Him  and 
amongst  themselves.  And  this  truly  and  substantially,  as  He  is 
truly  one  in  substance  with  the  Father.  For  just  as  the  Father  is 
united  to  the  Son  in  the  same  Essential  Godhead,  so  are  the  Apostles 
and  all  the  faithful  united  one  with  another  in  the  same  substance 
of  the  manhood  and  Godhead  of  Christ,  which  they  receive  in  the 
Eucharist 

Ver.  1 2. — When  Iwas  with  them  I kept  them  in  Thy  Name , i.e.  “ by 
Thy  power,  by  Thy  authority,  as  Thy  messenger  to  them.”  So  S. 
Cyril  For  they,  knowing  that  I was  sent  by  Thee,  willingly  and  boldly  f 
cleaved  to  Me,  as  knowing  that  through  Me  they  were  cleaving  to 
God,  and  were  blessed  and  protected  by  Him.  For  those  whom  the 
Son  guards,  the  Father  guards  also.  Others  explain  “ Thy  Name  ” 
as  meaning,  for  the  sake  of  Thee  and  Thy  boundless  goodness. 

Those  that  Thou  gavest  Me  I have  kept,  and  none  of  them  is  lost,  but 
the  son  of  perdition . The  word  “ son  ” means  here,  worthy  of, 
guilty  of.  And  hence  it  is  plain  that  Christ  here  did  not  pray  for 
Judas,  who  had  withdrawn  from  the  company  pf  the  Apostles  in 
order  to  betray  Christ  He  had  not  been  given  to  Christ  by  the 
Father,  but  had  destroyed  himself  by  his  covetousness  in  betraying 
Me,  and  therefore  passed  away  into  the  number  of  the  reprobate. 

That  the  Scripture  might  be  fulfilled.  This  signifies,  not  the  end 
and  intent  of  Scripture,  but  merely  that  it  so  came  to  pass  in  order 
that  the  Scripture,  which  cannot  lie,  should  be  fulfilled.  See  Ps. 
cix.  8,  and  Acts  i.  20. 

Ver.  13. — And  now  come  I to  Thee  (I  shall  soon  come  at  My  ascen- 
sion) ; and  these  things  I speak  in  the  world,  that  they  might  have  My 
joy  fulfilled  in  themselves.  I speak  of  these  things,  in  order  that  the 
Apostles  may  fully  rejoice  with  Me  at  these  great  blessings,  and  hope 
that  they  will  hereafter  be  received  by  Me  into  heaven,  to  the  same 
glory  with  Myself. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


202 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XVII. 


S.  Augustine  says,  “ He  stated  before  the  nature  of  this  glory, 
when  He  said  * that  we  may  be  one.*  For  this  is  the  peace  and 
blessedness  of  the  life  to  come.” 

Ver.  15. — I pray  not  that  Thou  shouldest  take  them  out  of  the  worlds 
but  that  Thou  shouldest  keep  them  from  the  evil . From  the  evil  (1.) 
first  of  guilt,  which  alone  is  real  evil  (2.)  Of  punishment,  i.e.  to 
preserve  them  from  every  adversity,  or  strengthen  them  to  bear  it 
(3.)  From  the  evil  one,  his  snares  and  temptations.  In  Greek 
roD 

Ver.  16. — They  are  not  of  the  world . He  repeats  what  He  had 
said  before  about  the  world,  to  show  why  the  Father  should  care 
for  and  protect  them,  viz.,  because  they  had  left  the  world,  and 
given  themselves  wholly  to  the  worship  and  protection  of  Christ. 

Ver.  17. — Sanctify  them  through  Thy  truth . This  signifies  not  the 
beginning  of  sanctification,  but  its  progress  and  perfection  (Rev.  xxi.) 
Confirm  and  perfect  them  in  holiness;  pour  into  them  by  the 
Holy  Spirit  at  Pentecost  complete  evangelical  truth,  that  they  may 
be  filled  with  wisdom  and  holiness,  both  within  and  without,  and 
thus  become  in  life  and  doctrine  true  teachers  of  the  world,  Priests 
and  Rulers  of  the  churches,  breathing  on  all  their  own  holiness,  as 
a fire  from  above. 

Thy  word  is  truth.  (1.)  It  is  not  Moses  or  Philosophers,  but  Thy 
word  which  teaches  this  evangelical  truth.  The  holiness  of  Moses 
and  the  Jews  was  merely  ceremonial  and  shadowy.  That  of  Philo- 
sophers was  either  pretended,  or  else  merely  moral  and  natural. 
That  of  Christ  was  supernatural,  heavenly,  and  divine.  Others  under- 
stand by  the  words,  sanctify  them  truly,  that  is  completely  and  per- 
fectly, as  the  Apostle  says  (Eph.  iv.  24.),  in  true  holiness  (the  holi- 
ness of  truth,  Vulg.).  For  perfect  and  great  holiness  is  required  in 
an  Apostle,  for  continuous  preaching,  for  resisting  tyrants,  for 
labouring  night  and  day,  for  suffering  martyrdom  and  death  (2  Cor. 
xL  2d.  It  can  be  explained  thus : “ Sanctify  them  in  Me,  who 
am  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life.  Make  them  partakers  of  My 
goodness  and  holiness.”  So  S.  Augustine  (in  loc.),  S.  Cyril,  Rupertus, 
and  S.  Thomas. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THY  WOkD  IS  TRUTH. 


503 

3d.  Maldonatus  explains  it:  Set  them  apart  as  holy  ministers 

and  preachers  of  the  Gospel.  But  in  truth,  not  in  shadow,  as  of 
old  Aaron  and  his  sons  were  consecrated  only  in  a shadowy  and 
typical  way.  So  S.  Chrysostom.  And  Jeremiah  (i.  5)  was  said  to 
have  been  sanctified  in  the  womb,  that  is  designated  and,  as  it  were, 
consecrated  as  a Prophet 

4th.  It  might  be  thus  understood  : " Make  them  holy  victims,  that 
they  may  be  sanctified  and  offered  to  Thee  in  martyrdom.”  It  was 
fitting  that  the  Apostles  should  become  martyrs,  in  order  to  confirm 
and  seal  the  holiness  of  their  doctrine  by  the  holiness  of  their 
martyrdom.  And  thence,  in  fact,  all  the  Apostles  were  martyrs, 
after  the  pattern  of  Christ,  who  said  (ver.  19),  “I  sanctify  Myself,” 
*.*.,  I offer  Myself.  For  in  Leviticus  the  victims  are  always  said 
to  be  sanctified,  when  they  are  offered  to  God.  See  below,  ver.  19. 
Observe,  Christ  as  man  had  a threefold  sanctity,  which  He  imparted 
to  the  Apostles  and  the  faithful.  (1.)  The  first  was  infused  into  the 
soul  of  Christ  at  the  very  instant  of  His  conception,  just  as  God 
bestows  all  power  on  us  by  virtue  of  His  merits.  (2.)  The  second 
was  Divine  sanctity,  by  which  the  Deity  is  Itself  most  holy,  and  the 
fount  of  all  holiness  in  men  and  angels.  For  Christ  had  this  as 
man  by  communicatio  idiomatum , by  which  the  attributes  of  God- 
bead  are  truly  ascribed  to  the  man  Christ,  as  subsisting  with  the 
Godhead  in  the  one  Person  of  the  Word.  (3.)  The  holiness  of 
Christ  as  man,  was  absolutely  caused  by  this  hypostatical  union  with 
the  Word,  for  by  this  the  manhood  of  Christ  was  absolutely 
sanctified  and  made  most  holy.  For  even  if  Christ  as  man  had 
had  no  infused  grace,  yet  His  very  hypostatical  union  with  the 
Word  was  His  highest  sanctification  and  holiness.  Whence  the 
manhood  of  Christ,  as  being  united  to  the  Word,  was  clearly 
impeccable,  most  pleasing  and  acceptable  to  God.  Nay  more, 
Christ,  as  man,  was  the  Son  of  God,  not  by  adoption,  as  we  are, 
but  properly,  and  in  His  very  nature. 

Thy  word  is  truth . The  gospel  which  I preach,  as  I received  it 
of  Thee,  is  not  shadowy,  as  was  the  old  Law,  but  is  in  spirit  and 
in  truth.  See  notes  on  chap.  xv.  3.  For  “ the  Law  was  given  by 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


504  S.  JOHN,  c.  XVll. 

Moses,  but  grace  and  truth  were  wrought  by  Jesus  Christ** 
(John  i.  17). 

Morally.  Learn  here  how  holy  a Christian  ought  to  be,  especially 
a “Religous”  and  Apostolic  man,  who  wishes  to  make  others 
holy,  so  as  to  be  like  the  Apostles,  and  even  like  Christ,  and 
to  be  diligent  in  imitating  their  most  holy  practices  and  deeds 
“ Christianity,”  says  S.  Gregory  Nyssen,  “is  the  imitation  of  the 
Divine  Nature.”  For  a Christian  ought  to  imitate,  as  much  as  He 
can,  the  holiness  of  God  in  Christ,  so  that  Christ  may  always  shine 
forth  in  his  words  and  actions,  and  that  any  one  who  sees  or  hears 
him,  may  think  that  he  sees  and  hears  Christ  Holiness  is  a turning 
away  from  the  world,  and  a turning  to  God  and  Christ,  and  union 
with  them.  Accordingly  the  Apostles  converted  the  world,  more  by 
their  holiness  and  burning  love  than  by  their  preaching.  Nay, 
they  thundered  with  their  mouth,  because  they  flashed  forth  in  their 
life,  as  Nazianzen  said  of  S.  Basil.  See  my  sketch  of  S.  Paul,  pre 
fixed  to  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles. 

Ver.  18. — As  Thou  hast  sent  Me  into  the  worlds  even  so  I also  have 
sent  them  into  the  world.  This  is  a fresh  reason  for  Christ  com- 
mending His  Apostles  to  the  Father,  to  preserve  and  sanctify  them. 
For  as  Thou  hast  Me  into  the  world  to  restore  and  sanctify  it,  so 
do  I send  My  Apostles  through  all  nations  to  sanctify  them.  They 
need  therefore  great  holiness,  so  as  not  to  be  ensnared  by  their 
allurements,  or  overpowered  by  their  persecutions,  and  also  that 
they  may  sanctify  them  who  are  utterly  depraved  by  their  vices. 
Sanctify  them  therefore,  O Father,  more  and  more  every  day,  that 
they  may  be  able  to  sanctify  numerous  others. 

Ver.  19. — And  for  their  sakes  I sanctify  Myself  that  they  also  might 
be  sanctified  through  the  truth.  1st.  S.  Augustine  uses  the  word 
sanctify  in  its  proper  sense.  I as  the  Son  of  God  sanctify  human 
nature  which  I have  assumed,  that  by  it  I may  sanctify  the  Apostles. 
As  S.  Augustine  says,  “When  the  Word  was  made  flesh,  He 
sanctified  Himself  in  Himself;  Himself  the  man,  in  Himself  the 
Word,  because  the  Word  and  the  Man  is  one  Christ  But  He  says 
it  for  the  sake  of  His  members ; and  for  these  I sanctify  Myself, 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


SANCTIFIED  IN  THE  TRUTH. 


205 


that  is,  them  in  Me,  because  in  Me  they  are  even  Myself.  That 
they  also  might  be  sanctified.  What  meaneth  this,  ‘ that  they  too? 
but  that  they  may  be  sanctified  even  as  I,  and  in  the  Truth  which  I 
Myself  am?” 

2d,  and  correctly,  " I offer  Myself  to  Thee  as  a Holy  Victim,” 
i.e.  within  a few  hours  I shall  offer  It  upon  the  Cross,  so  that 
they  may  by  It  “ be  sanctified  in  the  truth,”  that  is,  that  by  Thy 
word  which  is  truth,  and  no  shadow,  they  may  be  sanctified,  be 
truly  Thine,  and  devote  themselves,  for  Thee,  to  Apostolic  labours ; 
in  order  to  convert  all  nations  to  Thee,  and  thus  by  the  sufferings 
they  endure,  even  martyrdom  itself,  they  may  offer  themselves  to 
Thee,  just  as  I do  Myself.  So  S.  Chrysostom,  S.  Cyril  (at  great 
length),  Rupertus,  S.  Thomas,  Jansenius,  Maldonatus,  Toletus, 
Ribera,  and  others. 

Ver.  20. — Neither  pray  I for  these  alone9  but  for  them  also  which 
shall  believe  on  Me  through  their  words . Up  to  this  point  Christ 
prayed  for  the  Apostles,  and  for  those  who  were  immediately  con- 
verted by  them.  Now  He  prays  for  the  whole  Church,  and  for  all 
future  generations  of  Christians,  for  He  is  their  Father  and  Patrh 
arch,  King  and  Prince,  Pontiff  and  Hierarch.  All  these  (says  Tole- 
tus) did  Christ  as  man  behold  in  the  Divine  Essence,  as  distinctly 
and  perfectly  as  though  they  were  present,  or  perhaps  it  was  by 
infused  knowledge.  For  it  was  this  latter  that  pertained  to  Christ 
as  man,  inasmuch  as  He  was  merely  a wayfarer  (viator) ; whereas 
the  sight  of  the  Divine  Essence  would  be  His,  not  as  journeying,  but 
as  beatified.  So  Suarez.  With  that  knowledge  then  He  beheld 
us  one  by  one,  and  all  the  faithful  who  would  hereafter  be  bom, 
and  for  each  and  all  He  asked  and  obtained  from  God  the  grace 
which  was  fitting  for  each.  And  it  is  by  the  force  of  this  prayer, 
that  the  faithful,  each  in  their  own  day,  obtain  all  their  blessings 
from  God.  He  prayed  then  for  all  the  Martyrs,  all  the  Doctors  of 
the  Church,  for  all  Virgins.  He  brought  them  all  severally  to  the 
birth  as  His  own  Benjamins,  and  therefore  every  Christian  should 
offer  unbounded  thanks  to  Christ  for  those  His  labour  pains,  and 
repay  love  for  love,  blood  for  blood,  death  for  death. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


20 6 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XVII. 


Ver.  21. — That  they  may  be  all  one . By  one  faith,  hope,  charity, 
and  concord  Learn  hence  how  united  Christians  should  be 
amongst  themselves,  and  how  far  removed  are  they  who  disseminate 
discord  and  strife,  from  the  mind  of  Christ 
As  Thou , Father , art  in  Me , and  I in  Thee , that  they  also  may  be 
one  in  Us \ For  God  is  love,  and  he  that  abideth  in  love  abideth  in 
God,  and  God  in  him.  i John  iv.  16.  By  faith  then  and  love  we 
are  united  to  God  and  Christ,  and  afterwards  mutually  to  each  other 
as  to  members  of  Christ’s  Mystical  Body,  the  Church.  The  word 
“as”  does  not  mean  identity,  as  the  Arians  held,  but  merely  resem- 
blance. For  the  Father  and  the  Son  are  one  by  the  same  numerical 
Essence  and  Godhead,  we  are  one  by  having  the  same  quality; 
namely,  love  and  concord.  But  by  this  we  are  so  united  to  God 
as  to  possess  Him,  and  be  in  turn  possessed  by  Him.  Hear  the 
author  “ De  Salutaribus  documentis ,”  assigned  to  S.  Augustine 
[probably  Paulinus  of  Aquileia] : “ If  we  are  pleased  at  possessing 
anything  in  this  world,  it  is  good  for  us  to  keep  in  our  minds  God 
who  created  and  is  the  Possessor  of  all  things,  and  to  have  in  Him 
all  that  we  holily  and  happily  desire.  But  since  no  one  possesses 
God,  save  he  that  is  possessed  by  Him,  let  us  become  the  posses- 
sion of  God,  and  He  will  become  our  possession.  For  what  greater 
happiness  can  there  be  in  the  world,  than  to  have  our  Lord  and 
our  Redeemer  counted  as  our  own,  and  whose  inheritance  the 
Godhead  deigns  to  be?  For  we  enjoy  every  blessing  from  Him  if 
we  live  from  Him,  and  in  Him.  For  what,  I ask  you,  suffices  a 
man,  if  the  Creator  Himself  does  not  suffice  him  ? What  does  he 
seek  further,  whose  Redeemer  ought  to  be  his  sole  joy,  and  every- 
thing to  him  ? By  love  therefore  we  are  so  united  to  God  as  to  be 
made  one  Spirit,  that  so  all  earthly  desires  in  us  may  be  swallowed 
up,  and  our  whole  mind  be  so  raised  up  by  its  affections  to  God,  as 
to  be,  in  a way,  deified.  Just  as  a drop  of  water  poured  into  gener- 
ous wine  is  absorbed  in  it,  and  as  iron  when  heated  passes  into 
heat,  though  the  nature  of  the  iron  still  remains,  and  as  the  air 
illumined  by  the  sun  turns  into  light,  so  that  it  seems  to  be  nothing 
else  but  the  light  of  the  sun,”  And  S.  Bernard  ( Sermon  Ixxi.  on  Cant.) 


Digitized  by 


Google 


UNION  WITH  GOD. 


207 


says,  “Who  is  He  that  cleaves  perfectly  to  God,  save  He  who, 
abiding  in  God,  as  beloved  by  Him,  has  in  like  measure  drawn  God 
into  himself  by  loving  Him  in  return  ? And  thus  when  men  cleave 
to  each  other  on  all  sides,  being  bound  up  in  their  mutual  and 
intimate  love  for  each  other,  I should  not  hesitate  to  say  that  in 
this  way  God  was  in  man  and  man  in  God.”  This  union  they  feel 
and  enjoy,  who  with  Magdalen  pass  a contemplative  life.  For  in 
that  life  the  loving  soul  flows  away  from  itself,  and  reduced,  as  it 
were  to  nothing,  falls  back,  and  is  absorbed  into  the  abyss  of  eternal 
love,  and  being  utterly  dead  to  itself,  lives  only  to  God,  knowing 
nothing,  and  caring  for  nothing  except  Himself.  For  it  loses  itsell 
in  the  boundless  solitude  and  depth  of  the  Godhead,  but  to  lose 
itself  thus,  is  far  happier  and  far  more  for  its  own  good,  than  to  find 
itself.  For  stripping  itself  of  everything  human,  and  arraying  itselt 
in  everything  which  is  Divine,  it  is  thus  transformed  and  changed 
into  God.  O truly  blessed  is  the  soul,  which  has  laid  aside  all  its 
own.  O truly  blessed  is  the  soul,  which  casting  off  every  action 
which  springs  from  itself  in  its  power  of  memory,  strips  itself  of  all 
its  imaginings,  in  its  understanding  feels  and  cherishes  the  brilliant 
rays  of  the  Sun  of  righteousness,  in  its  faculty  of  desire  feels  a 
certain  glow  of  calm  love,  or  the  action  of  the  Holy  Spirit  flowing 
with  rivers  of  eternal  sweetness,  like  some  real  fountain.  For  when 
it  is  set  free  and  detached  from  all  things  else,  and  it  exists  in  its 
own  simplicity,  and  is  cleansed  as  a bright  mirror,  the  Lord  is  wont 
to  enlighten  it  with  the  rays  of  His  own  Divine  brightness.  For 
when  God  Himself  is  acting,  man  is  only  passive.  For  when  the 
powers  of  the  soul  are  resting,  and  not  engaged  in  their  own  proper 
actions,  and  set  free  from  any  outward  impressions,  God  Himself 
speaks,  and  disposes,  and  impresses  those  powers  of  the  soul  just 
as  He  pleases,  carrying  on  within  a most  glorious  work.  And 
therefore,  O most  generous,  O most  noble  soul,  keep  thyself  pure 
and  free,  rush  not  ahead  for  every  variety  of  sensual  pleasure,  but 
restrain  thy  senses,  dwell  in  thine  own  thoughts,  turn  thyself 
ardently  to  God,  and  immersed  a thousand  times  daily  in  the  abyss 
of  the  Godhead,  be  careful  to  swim  up  and  down  therein.  Pant  for 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


208 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XVII. 


that  supernatural  union  of  the  spirit  with  God,  fly  back  to  God 
from  whom  thou  derivest  thy  being,  for  He  is  the  uncreated  Light, 
and  the  Light  also  of  eternity.”  Accordingly  S.  Bernard  rightly 
exclaims  (De  Div.  Amor>  cap . iv.),  “ O happy,  yea  most  happy  soul, 
whom  God  vouchsafes  to  influence  so  that  by  unity  of  spirit  with 
God  it  loves  God  only,  and  not  its  own  private  good,  and  loves 
itself  only  as  in  God ; while  God  loves  or  approves  in  it  only  that 
which  He  ought  to  approve,  that  is  to  say  Himself,  which  in  truth 
ought  alone  to  be  loved  both  by  the  Creator  and  the  creature.  For 
the  name  and  feeling  of  love  belongs  and  is  due  to  Thee  alone,  O 
thou  beloved  Lord,  Thou  true  love.”  And  he  concludes  thus  with 
the  words  from  S.  John,  “ This  is  the  will  of  Thy  Son  in  us.  This 
His  prayer  to  Thee  His  Father,  I will  that  as  I and  Thou  art  one, 
so  they  also  may  be  one  in  Us.  This  is  the  end,  this  the  consum- 
mation, this  is  perfection,  this  is  peace,  this  is  joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghost,  this  is  silence  in  heaven.” 

That  the  world  may  believe  that  Thou  hast  sent  Me . Not  merely 
through  its  unity  and  agreement  in  doctrine,  as  Euthymius  supposes, 
but  through  its  union  with  God  and  Christ  That  is,  even  by  this 
mark  alone  will  the  world  believe  Christ  to  be  the  Son  of  God, 
because  it  will  behold  Christians  both  united  to  God  and  Christ  as 
well  as  by  mutual  love  to  each  other.  For  it  will  see  that  such  an 
union  could  not  be  effected  except  by  Christ  and  God.  And  there- 
fore it  will  be  attracted  by  this,  so  as,  though  now  unbelieving,  to 
cast  off  its  unbelief  and  to  believe.  The  “ world  ” is  here  used  in  a 
good  sense,  as  in  John  iii.  17  and  2 Cor.  v.  19.  Jansen  less  correctly 
considers  the  “ world  ” here  to  mean  the  reprobate ; in  this  sense, 
“ That  it  will  be  forced  by  the  evidence  of  the  miracles  and  the 
holiness  of  My  disciples  to  confess  Me  to  be  God.  As  S.  James 
says,  ‘ the  devils  believe  and  tremble/  ” 

Ver.  22. — And  the  glory  Thou  gavest  Me  I have  given  them , that 
they  may  be  one , even  as  we  are  one . By  the  “ glory,”  understand  (1.) 
The  glory  of  the  Divine  Sonship.  For  Christ  has  this  as  God  by 
nature,  and  as  man  by  the  hypostatical  Union.  And  this  He  gives 
to  the  holy  faithful  ones,  to  have  it  not  by  nature,  but  by  adoption, 


-Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  GLORY  OF  THE  BODY.  2C# 

* 

and  to  be  the  sons  of  God,  not  by  nature,  as  Christ,  but  as  adopted. 
So  Jansenius,  and  before  him  S.  Ambrose,  v.  4. 

2.  Maldonatus  understands  by  the  word  " the  love,”  that  whereby 
the  Father  glorified  Him  at  His  baptism,  and  elsewhere  by  show- 
ing Him  forth  as  His  Beloved  Son. 

3.  Leontius  and  Ribera  understand  it  to  be  the  Eucharist,  for  in 
this  the  Godhead  and  Manhood  of  Christ  are  given  to  us.  And  this 
is  the  highest  glory,  for  we  being  many  are  one  Body,  for  we  are  all 
partakers  of  the  one  Body  and  the  one  Cup.  (1  Cor.  x.)  And  in 
like  manner  S.  Cyril,  xi.  26,  and  S.  Hilary  (de  Trinit . viii.),  explain  it 
of  the  Godhead  of  the  Word  united  to  the  flesh,  for  Christ  received 
this  as  man  from  the  Father,  when  the  Word  was  made  flesh.  And 
this  Christ  gave  to  us  when  He  made  His  flesh  to  be  our  food,  and 
He  is  united  really  and  truly  to  us  by  this  wonderful  sacrament. 

Toletus  takes  the  same  view,  who  thus  explains  it,  I have  already 
made  them  one  by  the  glory  I received  from  Thee.  Give,  O Father, 
thy  Holy  Spirit,  that  they  may  also  become  one.  This  glory  is  the 
Godhead  of  the  Son,  which  He  says  He  has  received  as  man  through 
the  Hypostatic  Union.  And  this  Godhead  united  to  His  flesh 
Christ  gave  to  us  in  the  sacrament  which  He  had  just  instituted. 

Symbolically . S.  Chrysostom  and  Euthymius  understand  by  * glory  * 
both  the  miraculous  power  which  Christ  gave  His  disciples,  and  also 
the  unity  of  concord,  of  which  it  was  said,  “ that  they  may  be  one.” 
For  these  two  were  an  effectual  argument  for  confirming  the  truth 
of  the  Faith,  namely  miracles,  and  the  wonderful  agreement  in  the 
belief  of  them. 

Anagogically . S.  Augustine  (in  loc.)  says,  “This  is  the  glorifying 
of  the  body.  The  immortality  and  glory  which  after  three  days  I 
will  give  to  My  Flesh  and  Manhood  at  My  Resurrection,  ‘ I have 
given/  ie.  I will  give  most  assuredly,  to  the  faithful  at  the  general 
resurrection/' 

Ver.  23. — 7 in  them , and  Thou  in  Me , that  they  may  be  made 
perfect  in  one,  and  that  the  world  may  know  that  Thou  hast  sent  Me, 
and  hast  loved  them  as  Thou  hast  loved  Me.  That  their  union  may 

be  consummated  and  perfected,  as  the  union  of  many  members  in 

vol.  v.  o 


Digitized  by 


Google 


210 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XVII. 


one  Body  and  Head.  For,  as  many  members  make  up  one  body, 
so  do  the  many  faithful  bind  together  the  one  mystical  Body  of  Christ, 
which  is  His  Church.  Again,  all  the  members  are  united  and  made 
complete  in  one  head,  so  are  all  Christians  in  One  Christ  and  God. 
Toletus  appositely  explains  it  of  the  Holy  Eucharist ; “I  am  in 
them,”  he  says,  “ by  My  flesh  given  them  as  their  true  and  real  food, 
but  Thou  art  in  Me,  because  Thy  Godhead  is  united  to  My  flesh. 
If  therefore  the  Godhead  is  in  My  flesh,  and  My  flesh  is  in  the 
believers,  it  comes  to  pass  that  the  Godhead  also  is  in  believers 
through  the  medium  of  the  Body  of  Christ.  Believers  therefore 
have  in  themselves  both  the  Body  of  Christ,  and  by  means  of  It 
the  Godhead.  They  become  one,  and  have  through  Christ  a kind 
of  unity  by  reason  of  their  flesh,  and  so  are  consummated  in  one, 
that  is,  become  perfectly  one,  as  not  only  being  united  amongst 
themselves,  and  with  God,  as  to  their  souls,  which  is  effected  by  the 
Holy  Spirit,  but  also  as  to  their  very  bodies.” 

. Hence  S.  Dionysius  {Be  Bivin.  Nom . cap.  iv.)  teaches  that  Divine 
Love  revolves  in  a circle,  because  it  comes  from  God  the  Father 
to  the  Son,  and  thence  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  through  Whom  it  returns 
to  the  Father  and  the  Son.  For  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  reasonable 
love  of  the  Father  and  the  Son.  Again,  it  moves  in  a circle,  because 
it  comes  from  God  into  the  creatures  (especially  into  men  and 
angels),  and  converts  them  to  the  love  and  enjoyment  of  God.  For 
as  God  is  the  efficient  cause  of  love,  so  also  is  He  its  end.  For 
love  transfers  him  who  loves  into  the  beloved  object  itself.  For 
the  soul  is  really  more  in  that  which  it  loves  than  in  that  which  it 
animates.  “ Therefore  S.  Paul  (Dionysius  says),  that  mighty  man, 
when  already  led  captive  by  Divine  Love,  and  endued  with  its 
strength,  which  lifts  up  a man  from  his  own  state,  says  with  inspired 
lips,  ‘I  live,  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  Me*  {Gal.  ii.  20). 
And  as  a true  lover,  lifted  above  his  own  sphere,  he  lives  to  God, 
not  his  own  life,  but  the  1 of  Him  who  loves  him,  as  in  truth 
a life  which  is  greatly  to  be  loved.”  And  afterwards  he  defines 
love  as  “a  power  impelling  to  action,  and  attracting  upwards  to 
itself,  &c.,  which  originates  from  goodness,  and  flows  from  that  source 


Digitized  by 


Google 


PERFECT  UNION  WITH  CHRIST.  211 

of  goodness  to  the  things  which  exist,  and  thence  flows  back  to 
goodness.  And  in  this,  Divine  Love  especially  shows  that  It  has 
neither  beginning  nor  end.  For  it  is  a perpetual  circle,  which, 
springing  from  a good  source  (from  that  which  is  good)  in  good 
deeds,  and  by  turning  back  from  all  which  is  wrong  towards  that 
which  is  good,  sets  itself  free,  and,  though  abiding  in  the  same  spot, 
is  ever  advancing,  and  yet  stationary,  and  comes  round  on  itself.” 

He  then  proves  it  by  the  authority  of  his  teacher,  S.  Hierotheus, 
who  says,  By  love,  whether  Divine  or  angelic  or  spiritual,  or  so  to 
speak  animal  or  natural,  we  must  understand  a force  which  unites 
and  blends  together,  which  impels  those  which  are  superior  to 
consult  the  good  of  those  who  are  inferior,  which  leads  those  on 
a level  to  join  in  intercourse  with  each  other,  and  inferiors  to  look 
up  to  superiors.  Hence,  too,  the  Egyptians  represented  God  as  a 
circle,  but  to  show  rather  that  He  was  eternal,  without  beginning  or 
ending,  and  accordingly  boundless.  Whence  the  saying,  “God  is 
a circle,  whose  centre  is  everywhere,  and  whose  circumference  is 
nowhere.”  The  Persians  also  called  Jupiter  the  circle  of  heaven ; 
and  the  Saracens  too  represent  God  under  the  same  image. 

Tropologically . Holy  souls  strive  after  perfect  union  with  Christ, 
forgetting,  as  it  were,  everything  beside,  to  keep  Him  ever  before 
their  eyes,  to  strive  in  all  things  to  please  Him,  continually  to  hold 
mental  converse  with  Him.  And  accordingly  they  withdraw  them- 
selves as  far  as  they  can  from  external  objects,  and  hold  colloquy 
with  Christ  in  their  hearts.  Bartholomew  de  Martyribus,  Archbishop 
of  Braga,  in  his  “Golden  Compendium  of  Spiritual  Doctrine,”  cap.  xv., 
which  Louis  of  Grenada  published  after  his  death,  and  professes 
that  by  reading  it  he  profited  greatly,  as  I also  say  myself,  gives 
three  tokens  of  such  inward  union  : — “ (i.)  The  first  is,  If  the  intellect 
no  longer  gives  utterance  to  any  thoughts  save  such  as  the  light  of 
faith  inspires,  and  the  will,  trained  by  long  practice,  gives  forth  no 
acts  of  love,  except  towards  God,  or  with  reference  to  Him.  (a.) 
That  as  soon  as  it  ceases  from  any  outward  employment,  in  which 
it  is  engaged,  the  understanding  and  the  will  are  readily  turned 
towards  God,  just  as  a stpne,  when  an  obstacle  is  removed,  speedily 


Digitized  by  i^ooQle 


212 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XVII. 


settles  down  on  its  point  of  rest.  (3.)  If,  when  prayer  is  over,  it 
entirely  forgets  all  external  objects,  as  though  it  had  never  seen  or 
been  engaged  in  them,  and  is  so  disposed  towards  outward  things 
as  though  it  were  now  for  the  first  time  entering  into  the  world,  and 
feared  to  engage  in  external  matters,  as  if  naturally  shrinking  from 
them,  unless  charity  compelled, — such  a soul,  set  free  from  all 
outward  things,  easily  withdraws  within  itself,  where  only  it  sees 
God,  and  itself  in  God  ; and  frequently  devotes  itself  to  fervid  and 
unitive  acts  of  love.  But  this  fervent  love  produces,  as  holy  men  say, 
six  effects.  (1.)  Illumination,  that  is  a relishing  and  experimental 
knowledge  of  God,  and  of  its  own  nothingness.  (2.)  Warmth.  (3.) 
Sweetness  or  delight.  (4.)  An  ardent  desire  to  obtain  divine 
blessings.  (5.)  Satiety,  for  the  mind  is  so  satiated  with  that  coming 
of  God  to  it,  that  it  wishes  or  desires  nothing  further.  (6.)  Rapture, 
or  a wondrous  lifting  up  of  the  soul  to  God,  in  which  it  is  impossible 
to  explain  how  it  feels  towards  Him.  And  two  other  effects  follow, 
a sense  of  security,  so  that  the  soul  fears  not  any  suffering  for  God’s 
sake,  and  is  fully  confident  that  it  will  never  be  separated  from 
Him;  and  perfect  rest,  when  there  is  nothing  which  can  inspire 
fear ; and  this  is  called  ‘ the  peace  which  passeth  all  understanding.1 
This  is  the  Paradise  of  God,  to  which  we  can  ascend,  even  when 
living  among  men  in  the  body.”  He  then  sets  forth,  from  S.  Thomas, 
three  means  of  obtaining  this  union  with  God  and  Christ,  viz., 
Boldness,  severity,  and  gentleness  of  mind.  Boldness,  to  drive 
away  all  negligence,  and  to  dispose  a man  to  perform  all  good 
works  confidently,  vigilantly,  and  methodically.  Severity  against 
concupiscence,  which  brings  with  it  an  ardent  love  of  hardness,  pro- 
fiting, and  poverty.  Gentleness,  to  expel  all  rancour,  anger,  envy,  aus- 
terity, bitterness,  and  hardness  against  one’s  neighbour.  For  the  soul 
must  first  be  purged  from  the  dregs  of  earthly  affections,  before  it  is 
able  to  ascend  simply  and  purely  to  God.  For  as  it  is  the  property 
of  fire  to  ascend,  so  do  souls,  when  set  free  from  the  burden  of 
evil  affections,  rise  up  to  God,  who  is  their  proper  resting-place. 

And  that  the  world  (the  faithful  in  the  world)  may  know 
that  Thou  hast  sent  Me . But  how?  (1.)  In  the  Beatific  Vision, 


Digitized  by^ 


1 


THE  ADOPTION  OF  SONS. 


213 


says  S.  Augustine  {in  loc.)  But  then  we  are  here  treating  of 
knowledge  in  this  world  by  faith.  (2.)  Others  say  that  we  shall 
know  by  the  glory  which  Christ  says  above  He  had  received  of  the 
Father,  and  given  to  the  faithful.  Whence  S.  Ambrose  (as  referred 
to  ver.  22)  explains  it  thus : “ The  faithful  will  know  that  Thou 

hast  sent  Me  into  the  world  in  the  flesh,  by  reason  of  the  Sonship, 
which  I have  bestowed  on  them,  in  adopting  them  to  be  the  sons  of 
God.  And  they  will  from  this  know  also  that  Thou  hast  loved 
them  as  Thou  hast  loved  Me  : them  as  my  adopted  sons,  Me 
as  Thy  Son  by  nature.”  (3.)  S.  Cyril  (xi.  27)  and  S.  Hilary  (de  Trin . 
lib.  viii.)  explain  it  thus  of  the  Eucharist  They  will  know  thereby 
two  things — first,  that  I am  Thy  Son,  sent  by  Thee  into  the  world. 
For  they  could  not  be  united  to  us,  unless  I had  the  Godhead  in 
that  Flesh,  which  I gave  them  in  the  Eucharist ; and  secondly,  that 
Thou  lovedst  them,  as  thou  lovedst  Me,  because  Thou  gavest  to 
them  the  Godhead  which  thou  didst  unite  with  My  flesh,  viz.  by 
giving  them  My  flesh  in  the  Eucharist.  (4.)  Ribera  explains  it  more 
simply.  The  world  acknowledges  it  from  the  holiness  and  the 
mutual  charity  of  the  Apostles,  by  which  they  were  “ made  perfect 
in  one.”  For,  as  S.  Chrysostom  rightly  says,  “The  Lord  judges 
that  concord  is  more  powerful  to  persuade  than  miracles.”  And 
“Thou  hast  loved  them  by  making  them  Apostles,  as  Thou  hast 
loved  Me,”  begetting  Me  as  Thy  Son  and  in  sending  Me  as  Thy 
ambassador  into  the  world.  He  thus  raises  their  minds  to  endure 
all  hardships  for  Christ’s  sake. 

Ver.  24. — Father,  I will  that  they  also  whom  Thou  hast  given  Me 
may  be  with  Me  where  I am;  that  they  may  behold  My  glory , 
which  Thou  hast  given  Me:  because  Thou  loiiedst  Me  before  the 
foundation  of  the  world.  He  sets  forth,  says  S.  Chrysostom,  “ the 
rewards  which  await  them  after  death,  to  show  the  love  of  Christ 
the  more  towards  them,  and  to  make  them  more  resolute,”  and  as  S. 
Cyril  says,  “ He  wishes  to  teach  that  none  will  see  His  glory  but 
those  for  whom  He  prayed,  and  who  by  Him  are  united  to  the 
Father.  For  He  says,  “ those  whom  Thou  hast  given  Me.”  And 
l earnestly  desire  that  they  may  behold  the  glory,  not  only  of  my 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


214 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XVII. 


manhood  exalted  to  the  right  Hand  of  the  Father  (as  SS.  Augustine 
and  Cyril  explain),  but  also  of  My  Godhead.  “ For  in  this  right  does 
our  blessedness  essentially  consist  But  when  He  says,  ‘Because 
Thou  lovedst  Me/  it  means,  it  is  a manifest  proof  that  Thou 
lovedst  Me  with  an  infinite  love  from  all  eternity,  because  in  be- 
getting Me,  Thou  gavest  Me  Thy  glory  and  Godhead.  But  He 
begat  Him  not  from  mere  love,  but  from  His  own  natural  fecundity 
as  God.  The  Father  therefore  first  begat  the  Son.  He  then  loved 
Him  whom  He  had  begotten,  for  He  had  begotten  One  who  was  in 
all  respects  like  Himself.”  So  Jansenius. 

Befort  the  foundation  of  the  world , This  signifies  that  the  world 
was  not  in  any  single  part  eternal,  but,  both  in  matter  and  form 
and  all  its  other  qualities,  was  created  by  God  in  the  beginning  of 
time,  when  its  foundations  were  laid. 

Ver.  25. — O righteous  Father , the  world  hath  not  known  Thee:  hut 
/ have  known  Thee , and  these  have  known  that  Thou  hast  sent  Me. 
Why  does  He  call  the  Father  c Righteous?*  (1.)  S.  Augustine  (in  loc.) 
says,  “ Because  He  justly  deprived  the  world  and  the  ungodly  of 
the  knowledge  of  Himself.  For  it  is  His  justice  that  the  truth  of 
God  is  not  revealed  to  some,  by  reason  of  their  sins.  But  it  is  His 
mercy  that  it  is  manifested  to  others.”  (2.)  S.  Cyril  (xi.  29)  thinks 
He  is  so  called  because  He  condemned  the  devil,  and  deprived 
him  of  his  power,  wherewith  he  held  the  world  captive,  and  kept 
him  from  attaining  that  immortality  for  which  he  was  created.  The 
meaning  then  is : O righteous  Father,  the  world  hath  not  known, 
this  Thy  justice,  which  Thou  didst  exercise  upon  the  devil,  for  the 
world’s  sake.  For  had  it  known  it,  all  would  have  flocked  to  Thee. 
(3.)  Toletus  thinks  it  was,  because  He  preferred  heavenly  glory  for 
the  Apostles  who  followed  Him,  which  glory  He  here  asked  for 
them,  and  from  which  He  shut  out  the  unbelieving  world.  For 
this  conferring  of  glory  is  a righteous  act.  See  2 Tim.  iv.  8.  (4.) 

Ribera,  more  plainly,  and  more  to  the  point,  refers  the  word  to 
what  follows.  Having  asked  for  heavenly  glory  for  the  Apostles, 
and  having  refused  to  give  these  gifts  to  the  unbelieving,  as  the 
Scribes  and  Pharisees  who  would  not  follow  Him,  He  says,  as  it 


Digitized  by  Google 


ABIDING  IN  GOD’S  LOVE. 


215 


were,  “It  is  just  that  the  proud  should  be  cast  off,  and  these 
blessings  be  conferred  on  these  Thy  little  ones.”  These  proud  ones 
have  not  recognised  nor  worshipped  Thee.  But  I have  acknow- 
ledged and  loved  Thee.  And  My  disciples,  after  My  pattern,  have 
acknowledged  Thee,  and  believed  in  Me.  I have  therefore  given 
them  great  knowledge  of  Thee,  and  will  give  them  greater  after  I 
have  risen,  and  sent  the  Holy  Spirit.  Just  as  from  the  same  cause 
He  exulted  in  the  Spirit  (Matt.  xi.  25). 

Ver.  26. — And  I have  declared  unto  them  Thy  Name , and  will 
declare  It  (after  My  Resurrection  and  the  sending  of  the  Holy 
Spirit) : that  the  love  wherewith  Thou  hast  loved  Me  may  be  in  them , 
and  I in  them . That  is,  that  Thou  mayest  continue  towards  them 
the  love  wherewith  Thou  iovest  Me,  and  Mine  also  for  My  sake 
And  indeed  manifest  it  in  greater  measure,  and  daily  benefit  them 
mote  and  more,  pouring  Thy  graces  and  blessings  upon  them : so 
that  they  may  daily  make  great  progress  in  sanctity  and  in  their 
Apostolic  work.  And  that  in  this  way  I may  continually  abide 
in  them  together  with  Thee,  and  may  cleave  more  closely  to  them 
through  Thy  ever-increasing  grace  and  charity  within  them.  For 
God,  when  He  loves  rational  creatures,  pours  into  them  that  most 
precious  and  most  Divine  gift  of  grace,  and  charity.  And  this  He 
does  not  do  to  irrational  beings,  as  the  sky,  the  sun,  the  stars, 
though  He  still  loves  them,  by  creating,  adorning,  and  governing 
them  by  His  love.  This  is  the  meaning  of  “ Thy  love  may  be  in 
them,”  for,  as  S.  Paul  says,  “ the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  our 
hearts  by  the  Holy  Spirit  which  is  given  us  ” (Rom.  v.  5).  Rupertus 
explains  it  somewhat  otherwise,  “ that  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  is  the 
Love  wherewith  Thou  Iovest  Me,  may  ever  firmly  dwell  and  abide 
in  them.”  But  it  comes  to  the  same  thing.  For  the  Holy  Spirit 
cannot  be  separated  from  charity,  any  more  than  fire  from  heat. 
For  to  whom  charity  is  given,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  given  also.  And 
as  long  as  charity  abides  in  a man,  so  long  does  the  Holy  Spirit 
abide,  and  indeed  the  whole  Trinity.  See  above,  xiv.  23. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


( 216  *) 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

Chris? s passion  is  here  described . I His  being  apprehended  in  the  garden, 

13  Led  before  Annas.  17  Peters  threefold  denial.  19  Christ  examined  by 
the  High  Priest,  and  smitten.  24  Sent  to  Caiaphas.  28  Accused  before 
Pilate.  33  Examined  by  Pilate , who,  finding  that  he  was  innocent , labours 
to  set  Him  free,  contrasting  Him  with  Barabbas. 

WHEN  Jesus  had  spoken  these  words,  he  went  forth  with  his  disciples  over 
the  brook  Cedron,  where  was  a garden,  into  the  which  he  entered,  and 
his  disciples. 

2  And  Judas  also,  which  betrayed  him,  knew  the  place  : for  Jesus  ofttimes 
resorted  thither  with  his  disciples. 

3  Judas  then,  having  received  a band  of  men  and  officers  from  the  chief  priests 
and  Pharisees,  cometh  thither  with  lanterns  and  torches  and  weapons. 

4  Jesus  therefore,  knowing  all  things  that  should  come  upon  him,  went  forth, 
and  said  unto  them,  Whom  seek  ye  ? 

5  They  answered  him,  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  Jesus  saith  unto  them,  I am  he. 
And  Judas  also,  which  betrayed  him,  stood  with  them. 

6  As  soon  then  as  he  had  said  unto  them,  I am  he,  they  went  backward,  and 
fell  to  the  ground. 

7  Then  asked  he  them  again,  Whom  seek  ye?  And  they  said,  Jesus  of 
Nazareth. 

8  Jesus  answered,  I have  told  you  that  I am  he : if  therefore  ye  seek  me,  let 
these  go  their  way  : 

9  That  the  saying  might  be  fulfilled,  which  he  spake,  Of  them  which  thou 
gavest  me  have  I lost  none. 

10  Then  Simon  Peter  having  a sword  drew  it,  and  smote  the  high  priest’s 
servant,  and  cut  off  his  right  ear.  The  servant’s  name  was  Malchus. 

11  Then  said  Jesus  unto  Peter,  Put  up  thy  sword  into  the  sheath:  the  cup 
which  my  Father  hath  given  me,  shall  I not  drink  it  ? 

12  Then  the  band  and  the  captain  and  officers  of  the  Jews  took  Jesus,  and 
bound  him, 

13  And  led  him  away  to  Annas  first;  for  he  was  father-in-law  to  Caiaphas, 
which  was  the  high  priest  that  same  year. 

14  Now  Caiaphas  was  he  which  gave  counsel  to  the  Jews,  that  it  was  ex- 
pedient that  one  man  should  die  for  the  people. 

15  IT  And  Simon  Peter  followed  Jesus,  and  so  did  another  disciple  : that  dis- 
ciple was  known  unto  the  high  priest,  and  went  in  with  Jesus  into  the  palace  of 
the  high  priest. 

But  Peter  stood  at  the  door  without.  Then  w?nt  out  ^hat  other  disciple, 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  HOLY  GOSPEL  OF  ST„  JOHN.  217 

which  was  knbwn  unto  the  high  priest,  and  spake  unto  her  that  kept  the  door, 
and  brought  in  Peter. 

17  Then  saith  the  damsel  that  kept  the  door  unto  Peter,  Art  not  thou  also  one 
of  this  man’s  disciples  ? He  saith,  I am  not. 

18  And  the  servants  and  officers  stood  there,  who  had  made  a fire  of  coals ; 
for  it  was  cold  : and  they  warmed  themselves  : and  Peter  stood  with  them,  and 
warmed  himself. 

19  IT  Hie  high  priest  then  asked  Jesus  of  his  disciples,  and  of  his  doctrine. 

20  Jesus  answered  him,  I spake  openly  to  the  world  ; I ever  taught  in  the 
synagogue,  and  in  the  temple,  whither  the  Jews  always  resort ; and  in  secret  have 
I said  nothing. 

21  Why  askest  thou  me?  ask  them  which  heard  me,  what  I have  said  unto 
them  : behold,  they  know  what  I said. 

22  And  when  he  had  thus  spoken,  one  of  the  officers  which  stood  by  struck  Jesus 
with  the  palm  of  his  hand,  saying,  Answerest  thou  the  high  priest  so  ? 

23  Jesus  answered  him,  If  I have  spoken  evil,  bear  witness  of  the  evil  : but  if 
well,  why  smitest  thou  me  ? 

24  Now  Annas  had  sent  him  bound  unto  Caiaphas  the  high  priest. 

25  And  Simon  Peter  stood  and  warmed  himself.  They  said  therefore  unto 
him,  Art  not  thou  also  one  of  his  disciples  ? He  denied  it , and  said,  I am 
not. 

26  One  of  the  servants  of  the  high  priest,  being  his  kinsman  whose  ear  Peter 
cut  off,  saith.  Did  not  I see  thee  in  the  garden  with  him  ? 

27  Peter  then  denied  again  : and  immediately  the  cock  crew. 

28  IT  Then  led  they  Jesus  from  Caiaphas  unto  the  hall  of  judgment : and  it 
was  early  ; and  they  themselves  went  not  into  the  judgment  hall,  lest  they  should 
be  defiled ; but  that  they  might  eat  the  passover. 

29  Pilate  then  went  out  unto  them,  and  said,  What  accusation  bring  ye  against 
this  man  ? 

30  They  answered  and  said  unto  him,  If  he  were  not  a malefactor,  we  would 
not  have  delivered  him  up  unto  thee. 

31  Then  said  Pilate  unto  them,  Take  ye  him,  and  judge  him  according  to  your 
law.  The  Jews  therefore  said  unto  him,  It  is  not  lawful  for  us  to  put  any  man  to 
death : 

32  That  the  saying  of  Jesus  might  be  fulfilled,  which  he  spake,  signifying  what 
death  he  should  die. 

33  Then  Pilate  entered  into  the  judgment  hall  again,  and  called  Jesus,  and 
said  unto  him,  Art  thou  the  King  of  the  Jews? 

34  Jesus  answered  him,  Sayest  thou  this  thing  of  thyself,  or  did  others  tell  it 
thee  of  me  ? 

35  Pilate  answered,  Am  I a Jew  ? Thine  own  nation  and  the  chief  priests 
have  delivered  thee  unto  me  : what  hast  thou  done  ? 

36  Jesus  answered,  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world  : if  my  kingdom  were  of 
this  world,  then  would  my  servants  fight,  that  I should  not  be  delivered  to  the 
Jews  : but  now  is  my  kingdom  not  from  hence. 

37  Pilate  therefore  said  unto  him,  Art  thou  a king  then?  Jesus  answered, 
Thou  sayest  that  I am  a king.  To  this  end  was  I born,  and  for  this  cause  came 
I into  the  world,  that  I should  bear  witness  unto  the  truth.  Every  one  that  is  of 
the  truth  heareth  my  voice, 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


218 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XVIII. 


38  Pilate  saith  unto  him,  What  is  truth  ? And  when  he  had  said  this,  he  went 
out  again  unto  the  Jews,  and  saith  unto  them,  I find  in  him  no  fault  at  all. 

39  But  ye  have  a custom,  that  I should  release  unto  you  one  at  the  passover : 
will  ye  therefore  that  I release  unto  you  the  King  of  the  Jews  ? 

40  Then  cried  they  all  again,  saying,  Not  this  man,  but  Barabbas.  Now 
Barabbas  was  a robber. 

I have  commented  on  the  Passion  (Matt,  xxvii.  and  xxviii.),  I 
shall  therefore  only  briefly  touch  on  those  points  which  are  related 
by  S.  John  only. 

Ver.  1. — When  Jesus  had  spoken  these  words,  He  went  forth  with 
His  disciples  over  the  brook  Cedron , where  was  a garden , into  the 
which  He  entered  and  His  disciples . Jesus  had  now  finished  that 
glowing,  and  long  discourse,  in  which  He  bade  His  disciples 
farewell,  and  was  hastening  to  His  Passion  and  Death.  In  fact, 
He  offered  Himself  to  it,  voluntarily,  by  going  into  the  garden,  and 
there  waiting  for  Judas  and  the  Jews,  by  whom  He  knew  He  was 
to  be  taken.  He  gave  thus  an  example  of  boldness  of  mind,  by 
first  choosing  for  Himself  the  very  spot  in  which  He  was  about  to 
contend  with  death,  sin,  and  the  devil,  as  though  sure  of  victory 
and  triumph.  It  is  hence  inferred  that  Jesus,  as  soon  as  He  had 
finished  His  discourse,  crossed  the  Brook,  and  that  the  dispute  of 
the  Apostles  about  precedence  (Luke  xxii.  24)  took  place,  not 
after  this  discourse  (as  S.  Augustine  thinks)  but  before  it.  When 
the  hymn  was  sung  is  uncertain,  for  S.  Matthew  seems  to  intimate 
that  it  was  sung  at  the  end  of  the  discourse  (Matt.  xxvi.  30). 
But  reason  seems  to  suggest  that  it  was  sung  before  it,  as  being  a 
giving  of  thanks  which  was  sung  immediately  after  the  supper, 
and  the  Eucharist,  and  before  this  discourse.  So  Chrysostom, 
Theophylact,  Euthymius  on  Matt  xxvi.,  and  Ribera  on  this 
passage. 

He  went  forth.  From  the  house,  where  He  began  and  finished 
the  whole  discourse.  But  F.  Lucas  and  others  think  that  the  latter 
part  of  the  discourse  (from  xiv.  31)  was  spoken  after  He  had  left 
the  house  on  the  way  to  the  Brook  Cedron.  But  then  “went 
forth  ” must  be  interpreted  “ passed  over/ 

Over  the  Brook  Cedron.  “The  torrent”  flowing  in  winter,  drjr 


Digitized  by  Google 


MEANING  OF  CEDRON. 


219 


in  summer.  The  torrent  signifies  the  violence  of  the  attack  made 
on  Christ  at  His  Passion.  And  He  passed  through  the  torrent,  to 
signify  that  He  was  going  into  a torrent  of  sufferings,  says  Jansenius, 
as  the  Psalm  has  it,  “ He  will  drink  of  the  Brook  in  the  way  ” (Ps. 
cx.  7).  And  hence  some  think  that  Jesus  was  brought  back  through 
the  Brook,  and  thrown  into  it  (see  Adrichom . num.  207),  as  in 
Ps.  lxix. 

Cedron.  So  called  from  the  cedars  growing  there.  S.  Thomas 
and  the  Syriac  and  Arabic  version.  But  it  is  a Hebrew  word  signify- 
ing darkness.  See  S.  Jerome  in  Locis  Hebr.  It  was  dark  as  being 
a shady  place,  or  from  the  blackness  of  the  waters,  or  from  the 
smoke  from  the  burning  of  bodies.  Cedron  is  a singular,  and  not 
a plural,  word.  It  lies  between  Jerusalem  and  Mount  Olivet,  and 
runs  through  the  valley  of  Jehosaphat.  It  was  the  common  burial- 
place,  and  the  Turks  are  now  buried  there.  And  it  is  in  this  valley 
that  all  men  will  be  gathered  together  at  the  last  judgment.  St. 
John  mentions  it,  (1.)  To  establish  historical  accuracy.  (2.)  As  it 
was  figurative,  for  as  David,  fleeing  from  Absalom,  crossed  the 
Brook  Cedron,  so  did  Christ  cross  the  same  Brook,  not  indeed  as 
flying  from  the  Jews,  but  as  going  forth  to  meet  them.  (3.)  To 
show  that  He  was  going  to  expiate,  not  His  own  sins,  but  those  of 
Adam  and  his  posterity,  however  monstrous,  such  as  those  com- 
mitted in  this  valley,  where  parents  burnt  their  children  alive  in 
honour  of  Moloch  (4.)  That  He  might  turn  the  place  of  His  suffer- 
ing into  one  of  triumph : For  it  was  from  the  neighbouring  Mount 
Olivet  that  He  rose  in  triumph  after  His  Resurrection.  And  when 
He  returns  to  judge  the  world,  it  is  there  that  He  will  be  seated  as 
Judge,  and  recompense  all  men  according  to  their  deserts. 

Where  was  a garden . Because  Adam  sinned  in  a garden,  Christ 
began  to  expiate  His  sin  in  a garden.  “ For  all  things  had  to  revert 
to  their  pristine  state,”  says  S.  Cyril.  S.  Chrysostom  adds,  “ For 
He  tarries  in  the  garden,  as  in  a prison.”  “ To  save  trouble,”  says 
Theophylact,  “to  the  Jews  who  were  seeking  Him;”  adding  also 
another  reason,  “ for  He  used  to  seek  solitary  places  which  gender 
silence,”  that  we  should  do  the  same,  (See  Matt  xxvi.) 


Digitized  by 


Google- 


220 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XVIII. 


Symbolically . Observe  that  Christ  first  went  into  the  desert, 
afterwards  into  the  corn-fields,  and  at  last  into  the  garden,  to  teach 
us  to  go  into  the  harvest-fields  of  preaching,  and  thence  to  the 
Passion  and  the  Cross.  Hear  S.  Ambrose  in  Luc.  lib.  iv. 
“Behold,”  says  he,  “by  what  ways  we  are  brought  back  to  para- 
dise. Christ  is  first  in  the  desert : He  guides,  He  instructs,  He 
informs,  He  exercises  man.  He  anoints  him  with  spiritual  oil. 
When  He  sees  that  he  is  stronger  He  leads  him  through  corn-fields 
and  fruitful  places  (as  when  the  Jews  complained  that  His  disciples 
plucked  the  ears  of  com  on  the  Sabbath  day),  for  He  had  then 
placed  the  Apostles  in  cultivated  ground,  and  in  a profitable  work. 
And  afterwards  He  planted  them  in  paradise,  at  the  time  of  His 
Passion,  when  He  crossed  the  Brook  Cedron,  where  was  a garden.” 

Ver.  4 —Jesus  therefore,  knowing  all  things  that  should  come  upon 
Him  (the  word  “ knowing  ” is  added,  that  no  one  should  suppose 
that  He  had  fallen  without  knowing  it,  and  unwillingly,  into  the 
hands  of  the  Jews,  but  that  He  knowingly  and  willingly  gave  Him- 
self up  to  them,  and  also  went  forward  to  meet  them),  went  forth , 
and  said  unto  them,  Whom  seek  ye  ? Judas  had  already  kissed  Jesus, 
and  had  thus  given  a sign  to  the  band  that  they  should  take  Him. 
But  Jesus  did  not  wish  to  be  taken  when  that  sign  was  given,  lest 
He  should  seem  to  be  taken  against  His  will.  He  then  by  the 
almighty  power  of  His  Godhead  held  back  the  soldiers,  and  fixed 
them  to  the  spot,  so  that  when  the  sign  was  given  they  djd  not  dare 
to  rush  forward  to  take  Him,  and  indeed  could  not.  Christ  accord- 
ingly boldly  stepped  forward  of  His  accord  to  meet  them,  and 
challenged  them,  as  it  were,  to  seize  Him,  by  asking,  Whom  seekye ? 

Ver.  5. — They  answered  Him,  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  They  said  not, 
“We  seek  Thee,”  but  they  say,  “We  seek  Jesus.”  And  therefore 
they  did  not  recognise  Him,  though  pointed  out  by  the  traitor’s 
kiss  (because  Jesus  had  smitten  them  with  blindness),  and  though 
the  officers  of  the  chief  Priests  had  often  seen  and  heard  Him  before 
this.  So  S.  Chrysostom  says : “ Thou  seest  His  irresistible  power, 
that  standing  in  the  midst  of  them  He  smote  them  with  blindness.” 
And  S.  Cyril,  “ His  Divine  Power  shone  forth,  for  though  He  put 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  SOLDIERS  THROWN  DOWN. 


221 


Himself  in  their  way,  He  was  not  recognised  by  those  who  were 
seeking  Him.” 

And  Judas  also , who  betrayed  Him , stood  with  them . Judas  had 
preceded  the  soldiers  in  order  to  betray  Jesus,  but  finding  that 
they  did  not  rush  forward  to  take  Him,  he  became  conscious  of 
his  perfidy,  and  turned  back  in  obstinate  impenitence,  not  to  the 
disciples,  but  to  the  soldiers,  in  order  to  be  defended  by  them 
against  Jesus,  whose  power  he  feared,  and  was  therefore  struck  to 
the  ground  with  them.  So  S.  Augustine.  But  Euthymius  and 
Ribera  think  that  Judas  came  up  to  Christ  and  kissed  Him,  after 
he  had  been  struck  down.  This  is  probable,  and  only  proves  the 
greater  shamelessness  of  Judas. 

As  soon  then  as  He  had  said  unto  them,  / am  He , they  went  back- 
ward, They  did  not  fall  forward  on  their  breasts,  lest  the  power 
which  threw  them  down  should  seem  to  have  come  from  behind,  but 
they  fell  backward,  to  make  it  plain  that  they  were  thrown  down  by 
the  power  of  Chrises  words,  and  that  they  could  not  bear  to  behold 
His  face  or  hear  His  words.  For  the  words  “ I am  ” reminded  them 
of  what  God  said  to  Moses  (Ex.  iii.)  “ I am  that  I am  : this  is  My 
Name;”  and  I can  annihilate  you  if  I will.  And  therefore  ye  are  those 
who  are  not : for  all  your  being  ye  receive  not  from  yourselves,  but 
directly  from  Me.  The  tropological  and  allegorical  meaning  I have 
given  Matt  xxvi.  50. 

Ver.  7. — If  therefore  ye  seek  Me , let  these  go  their  way . Why  was 
this?  (1.)  That  He  might  by  His  own  death  alone  redeem  the  world. 
“ He  removed  His  disciples  out  of  danger,”  says  S.  Cyril,  “as  know- 
ing that  the  contest  and  the  work  of  our  salvation  pertained  to  Him 
alone,  as  being  the  work  of  a ruler  and  not  of  one  under  him.” 
(2.)  Because  He  destined  the*  Apostles  to  succeed  Him,  and  spread 
His  truth  over  the  world  after  His  death  and  Resurrection.  (3.) 
To  show  His  great  love  and  care  for  them,  as  a shepherd  careth  for 
his  sheep,  as  S.  John  suggests  in  the  next  verse. 

Ver.  9. — That  the  saying  might  be  fulfilled , which  He  spake ; Oj 
them  which  Thou  gavest  Me  hovel  lost  none , i.e.  of  the  eleven  Apostles 
which  Thou  gavest  Me  : for  Judas,  as  the  son  of  perdition,  was  not 


►igitizec 


222 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XVIII. 


given  Him  absolutely  of  the  Father.  But  of  what  loss  and  death 
does  Christ  here  speak:  of  the  soul  or  of  the  body?  Some  say 
one,  some  another.  But  I say,  both  of  body  and  soul.  For  they 
would  have  perished  in  the  body  if  they  had  been  seized  and  slain 
together  with  Jesus,  more  especially  because  Peter  had  withstood 
them  and  had  wounded  Malchus.  They  would  have  also  perished 
in  their  souls,  because  they  would  have  denied  Christ  in  their  weak- 
ness, and  from  fear  of  the  threats  of  the  Jews,  just  as  Peter  denied 
Him.  And  so,  when  killed  by  the  Jews  they  would  have  perished 
both  in  body  and  soul.  For  they  would  have  died  in  the  mortal 
sin  of  denial.  So  Rupertus,  Cajetan,  Ribera,  F.  Lucas,  Toletus, 
and  others. 

Ver.  io. — But  there  was  a servant  named  Malchus . He  mentions 
the  name  of  the  servant  to  signify  the  mystery.  For  Malchus  is 
the  same  as  “ king.”  But  as  the  servant  of  the  High  Priest  he 
signifies  the  Jewish  people,  which  was  formerly  a kingly  and  free 
power,  but  afterwards  became  subject  to  the  Priesthood,  which 
burdened  it  with  its  traditions  and  ceremonies,  and  also  preyed 
upon  it.  See  Matt,  xxiii.  Now  this  man,  when  S.  Peter  and  the 
Apostles  preached  the  Gospel,  lost  his  right  ear  on  account  of  his 
unbelief  and  hatred  of  Christ : that  is,  he  became  deaf  to  the 
Gospel,  and  to  those  things  which  were  necessary  to  salvation,  till 
the  Lord  converted  him,  and  healed  his  ear.  So  S.  Cyril  (in  loc.\ 
S.  Ambrose  on  Luke  xxii.,  and  S.  Jerome  on  Matt.  xxvi.  S.  Ambrose 
adds  that  S.  Peter  wished  to  imitate  the  zeal  of  Phinehas,  who  slew 
a prince  of  Israel  who  committed  fornication  with  the  daughters  of 
Moab  : and  thus  obtained  the  High  Priesthood  (Num.  xxv.)  The 
love  therefore  of  S.  Peter,  and  his  zeal  for  Christ,  lessened  his  fault. 
And  yet  he  sinned  in  drawing  his  sword  without  consulting  Christ, 
more  especially  when  he  had  heard  just  before  from  His  own  lips, 
that  He  was  going  of  His  own  accord  to  His  Passion  and  Death. 

Ver.  12. — Bound  Him . By  Whom  they  should  have  wished  to 
be  set  free.  And  maybe  they  were  of  the  number  of  those  who, 
when  afterwards  set  free  by  Him,  said,  “ Thou  hast  burst  my  bonds 
in  sunder”  (Ps.  cxvl  14),  says  S.  Augustine.  Christ,  had  He  so 


Digitized  by 


Googk 


WHY  CHRIST  WAS  BOUND. 


223 


willed,  wpuld  h»ve,broken  all  the  bonds  of  the  Jews  more  easily  than 
Samson  burst  the  hempen  bonds  of  Delilah  (Judges  xv.  9).  But 
He  would  not— (1.)  In  order  to  expiate  the  sin  of  Adam  which  he 
committed  with  His  hands.  For  since  the  first  Adam  too  readily 
stretched  forth  his  hands  to  the  forbidden  fruit,  Christ  the  second 
Adam  was  willing  to  be  bound  in  order  to  expiate  the  sins  of 
Adam  and  his  posterity,  which  are  most  commonly  wrought  with 
the  hands. 

(2.)  To  fulfil  the  type  : for  Isaac,  who  was  a type  of  Christ,  was 
bound  when  about  to  be  offered  by  Abraham.  For  the  victims  * 
were  bound,  lest  they  should  struggle  against  being  offered  (Gen. 
xxii.  9). 

(3.)  That  by  having  taken  on  Him  these  bonds  from  love  of  us, 
He  might  bind  us  with  the  cords  of  love,  as  is  said  (Hos.  xi.  4), 

“ I will  draw  them  with  cords  of  a man,  with  bands  of  love.” 

. Moreover,  it  is  clear  that  the  Jews  firmly  and  cruelly  bound  Christ, 
both  from  the  intense  hatred  with  which  they,  and  their  masters  the 
Chief  Priests,  burnt  against  Him,  as  wishing  to  avenge  their  igno- 
minious fall  which  they  had  suffered  at  His  hands,  and  the  violence 
of  St.  Peter  towards  Malchus  and  themselves.  See  notes  on  Matt, 
xxv.  55. 

Ver.  13. — And  they  led  Him  away  to  Annas  firsts  for  he  was  father - 
in-law  to  Caiaphas , which  was  the  High  Priest  that  same  year . 
But  why  did  Judas  and  the  Jews  lead  Him  first  to  Annas,  and  not 
to  Caiaphas,  when  He  had  to  be  judged  by  Caiaphas  (as  High 
Priest),  and  not  by  Annas  ? 

I answer  (1.)  To  pay  honour  to  Annas,  as  being  the  elder,  and 
father-in-law  to  Caiaphas,  whom  “ Caiaphas  honoured  as  father,”  says 
Euthymius,  and  by  whose  counsel  he  governed  the  people.  (2.) 
The  house  of  Annas  was  in  the  way  to  that  of  Caiaphas.  (3.)  Because 
Annas  especially  wished  and  arranged  for  the  seizure  of  Christ. 
And  hence  the  soldiers  lead  Him  as  it  were  in  triumph,  in  order  to 
delight  him,  and  that  they,  in  return,  themselves  might  obtain  some 
reward  for, so  doing.  (4.)  To  summon  Annas  (who  on  the  previous 
evening  had  gone  to  his  own  house,  on  account  of  the  cold)  to 


224 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XVIII. 


attend  the  council  which  was  about  to  be  held  Ae*next  morning  at 
the  house  of  Caiaphas  to  try  Jesus.  (5.)  And  specify,  because 
Annas  had  promised  Judas  the  reward  of  his  betrayal,  Judas  there- 
fore takes  Jesus  to  his  house,  to  obtain  from  him  the  thirty  pieces 
he  had  promised,  and,  as  S.  Cyril  thinks,  he  then  actually  received. 
And  this  is  inferred  from  the  fact  that  in  the  first  agreement  with 
the  Rulers,  the  money  was  only  promised,  not  paid  (see  Matt, 
xxvi.  15).  Judas  therefore  received  them  this  very  night  at  the  house 
of  Annas,  and  shortly  afterwards,  in  sorrow  at  what  he  had  done, 

* 

threw  them  down  in  the  temple  (Matt,  xxvii.  3).  For  he  could  not 
receive  them  at  the  house  of  Caiaphas,  who  was  so  engaged  in 
finding  false  witnesses,  in  examining  Christ,  in  summoning  the 
Council,  &c.,  that  he  had  no  time  to  treat  with  Judas.  And  Judas 
does  not  appear  to  have  gone  with  the  soldiers  further  than  to  the 
house  of  Annas,  or  to  have  entered  the  house  of  Caiaphas.  For  if 
Judas  had  been  there,  Peter  would  not  have  gone  in,  for  fear  of 
Judas  betraying  him.  For  if  Judas  had  been  present  in  the  house 
of  Caiaphas  when  Peter  thrice  denied  Christ,  he  would  certainly 
have  either  publicly  convicted  him  of  falsehood,  or  have  secretly 
informed  the  servants  that  Peter  was  a fellow-disciple  of  Christ,  in 
order  that  they  might  apprehend  him. 

The  high  Priest  that  same  year.  Because  the  Roman  Governors 
often  changed  the  High  Priests  every  year,  and  created  new  ones ; 
though  it  was  peculiar  to  Pilate  that  he  did  not  remove  Caiaphas 
whom  he  found  High  Priest : who  accordingly  held  the  High 
Priesthood  for  the  whole  three  years  of  Christ’s  ministry. 

Ver.  22. — One  of  the  servants  struck  Jesus . S.  Augustine  (in  loc.) 
having  enumerated  many  punishments  which  a slave  deserved,  says, 
“ But  which  of  these  could  He  not  have  commanded  by  His  power 
(since  the  world  was  made  by  Him),  unless  He  preferred  to  teach  us 
patience  by  which  the  world  is  overcome?  See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  59. 
Moreover,  Christ  turned  not  the  other  cheek,  lest  He  should  appear 
to  admit  His  fault.  As  S.  Paul,  too,  when  smitten  unjustly  said,  in 
his  zeal  for  justice,  “ God  shall  smite  thee,  thou  whited  wall”  (Acts 
xxiii.)  “ He  offered  not,”  says  S.  Augustine,  “ His  other  cheek  to  the 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


CHRIST  IN  THE  PRCETORIUM. 


225 


smiter,  but  made  His  whole  Body  ready  for  being  nailed  to  the 
Cross,  in  order  to  confirm  His  own  teaching,  by  His  example  (Matt. 
V-  39)- 

Ver.  24. — Now  Annas  sent  Him  bound  unto  Caiaphas  the  High 
Priest '.  The  Syriac  and  Arabic  versions,  as  also  S.  Cyril,  read  “ had 
sent  Him,”  and  so  too  English  version.  But  it  seems  as  if  S.  John 
had  forgotten  to  mention  the  sending  of  Jesus  from  Annas  to 
Caiaphas,  and  here  inserted  it  out  of  place,  whereas  it  should  come 
in  after  ver.  13. 

Ver.  28. — Then  led  they  Jesus  from  Caiaphas  unto  the  prcetorium . 
To  the  house  and  hall  of  Pilate ; for  he  was  Praetor,  that  is,  both 
civil  and  criminal  judge  of  Judaea.  S.  Augustine  reads  (inaccu 
rately)  unto  Caiaphas  into  the  Prcetorium , and  therefore  was  obliged 
to  say  either  that  Caiaphas  came  to  the  house  of  Pilate,  or  that 
they  both  lived  in  the  same  house,  though  the  contrary  is  plain 
from  the  Gospel. 

Every  magistrate  who  had  an  army  under  him,  was  called  Praetor, 
a prceeundo . And  the  place  in  which  he  held  trials  was  called 
Praetorium;  a place  in  which  criminals  were  tried,  for  which 
purpose  Jesus  was  brought  thither  by  the  Chief  Priests. 

But  they  themselves  entered  not  into  the  judgment-hall  lest  they 
should  be  defiled  (by  entering  the  house  of  the  heathen  governor), 
but  that  they  might  (as  pure  and  clean)  eat  the  Passover.  The 
Passover  does  not  here  mean  the  Paschal  Lamb  (as  SS.  Chrysostom 
and  Cyril  suppose),  for  that  they  had  eaten  the  day  before;  but 
the  Paschal  victims,  which  were  sacrificed  during  the  whole  seven 
days,  which  could  be  eaten  only  by  those  who  were  clean.  See 
here  the  hypocrisy  of  the  Pharisees,  who  wished  to  appear  most 
religious,  though  in  truth  utterly  wicked  and  the  murderers  of  Christ. 
S.  Augustine  exclaims,  “O  impious  and  foolish  blindness!  for 
forsooth  they  would  be  defiled  by  a dwelling  which  was  another’s, 
and  not  be  defiled  by  a crime  which  was  their  own.”  See  S.  Cyril. 

Ver.  31. — It  is  not  lawful  for  us  to  put  any  one  to  death . For  the 
Romans,  it  appears,  had  deprived  the  Jews,  as  a conquered  people, 

of  the  power  of  capital  punishment,  and  claimed  it  for  themselves. 

VOL.  V.  P 


Digitized  by 


Google 


226 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XVIII. 


This  is  the  meaning  of  the  words.  See  Rupertus,  S.  Thomas,  Jansen, 
Suarez,  and  others.  You  will  say  the  Jews  stoned  S.  Stephen,  and 
threw  down  S.  James  headlong.  But  this  was  not  in  course  of  law, 
but  in  a popular  tumult.  Josephus  (Ant.  xx.  8,  al.  16)  says  that 
Annas  was  deposed  from  his  office  by  the  Roman  governor  for 
ordering  S.  James  to  be  killed,  and  (Acts  xviii.)  the  Jews  did  not 
dare  to  kill  Paul,  but  handed  him  over  to  the  Proconsul  Gallio.  But 
you  will  urge  that  Pilate  had  already  given  the  Chief  Priests  liberty 
to  judge  and  to  put  Him  to  death,  when  he  said,  “Take  ye  Him 
and  judge  Him  according  to  your  law.”  I answer,  that  they  could 
have  done  so,  but  were  unwilling  to  accept  his  offer.  They  said, 
as  it  were,  in  their  minds,  Ye  Romans  have  taken  away  from  us 
altogether  the  power  of  the  sword.  We  therefore  do  not  wish  to 
exercise  it  in  this  particular  case.  Either  restore  us  this  power 
absolutely,  or  else  take  your  part  in  the  deed.  This  they  said  as 
wishing  Jesus  to  suffer  the  most  ignominious  death,  that  of  crucifixion 
as  a seditious  person,  and  aiming  at  kingly  power.  And  they  wished 
to  transfer  from  themselves  to  Pilate  the  unpopularity  of  His  death. 
For  they  feared  they  should  be  stoned  by  the  people,  who  were  in 
favour  of  Jesus,  or  else  be  assailed  by  their  revilings. 

Others  reply  (as  S.  Augustine  and  S.  Cyril,  and  Suarez  after  them , 
par  Hi.  Quasi.  Ixvii \ art.  4),  that  it  was  not  lawful  for  the  Jews  to 
put  Him  to  death  at  the  Passover  (being  a solemn  feast),  but  that 
it  was  lawful  at  other  times.  But  Ribera  replies,  that  it  was 
specially  the  practice  of  the  sect  of  the  Pharisees  not  to  condemn 
any  one  to  death  (see  Josephus  Ben-Gorion,  Hist.  Jud.  iv.  6). 
They  said  therefore,  “It  is  not  lawful  for  us,”  under  the  cloak  of 
religion.  For  many,  and  the  chief  of  those  who  aimed  at  the  death 
of  Christ,  were  Pharisees.  And  because  they  had  authority  with 
the  people,  others  followed  their  lead. 

Ver.  32. — That  the  saying  of  Jesus  might  be  fulfilled  which  He 
spake  signifying  by  what  death  He  should  die,  viz.  that  He  was  to 
be  delivered  up  to  the  Gentiles,  and  to  be  crucified  by  them.  See 
John  xii.  32  and  Matt.  xx.  18. 

Ver.  33. — Then  Pilate  entered  into  the  judgment- hall  again.  He 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHRIST’S  WITNESS  TO  THE  TRUTH.  227 

had  gone  out,  to  hear  the  charges  which  the  Jews  brought  against 
Jesus,  and  then  came  back  again  to  examine  Him. 

And  said  unto  Him , Art  Thou  the  King  of  the  Jews?  It  appears 
from  Luke  xxiii.  2,  that  when  the  Chief  Priests  saw  that  they  could 
not  move  Pilate  by  their  mere  authority  to  condemn  Jesus,  they 
brought  against  Him  the  charge  of  perverting  the  nation,  of  for- 
bidding to  pay  tribute  to  Caesar.  Pilate  caught  at  this  last  charge, 
and  put  this  question.  See  notes  on  Matt,  xxvii.  11. 

Ver.  37. — Thou  sayest  that  l am  a King \ i.e.  I am  in  truth  the 
King  of  the  Jews,  to  rule  in  the  faithful  by  faith  and  grace,  and 
bring  them  to  My  heavenly  Kingdom. 

To  this  end  was  1 bom , and  for  this  cause  / came  into  the  world , 
that  1 should  bear  witness  unto  the  truth.  To  evangelical  truth, 
which  mainly  consists  in  these  things — (1.)  In  the  true  knowledge 
of  God,  namely,  that  He  is  One  in  Essence,  and  threefold  in 
Person. 

For  every  being  is  true,  that  is  a true  and  not  an  imaginary  thing, 
and  is  true  in  itself.  Wherefore  God,  who  is  Very  Being  (I  am  that 
I am)  is  also  truth,  and  good  itself.  Because  His  essential  Being  is 
Truth  and  Goodness.  Again,  the  Son  who  proceedeth  from  the 
Father,  as  His  Word,  is  Truth  Itself,  not  merely  of  existence  but 
of  mind.  Whence  S.  Augustine  says,  when  Jesus  bears  witness  to 
the  truth,  He  bears  witness  to  Himself,  for  He  Himself  is  truth. 

(2.)  In  the  knowledge  of  the  Incarnation  ; namely,  to  know  that 
the  Son  was  sent  into  the  world  in  the  flesh,  that  He  might  save 
the  world,  and  that  no  one  can  be  saved,  except  by  faith  in  Him 
(see  John  xvii.  3). 

(3.)  In  the  knowledge  of  true  blessedness : viz.,  that  it  consists 
not  in  wealth,  honours,  &c.,  but  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  i.e.  in  the 
vision  and  possession  of  God.  For  the  sum  of  Christ’s  preaching  was, 
“Repent  ye,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand  ” (Matt.  iii.  2). 

Christ  says  that  He  was  born  to  bear  witness  to  the  Truth.  (1.) 
To  keep  Pilate  from  wondering  that  He  owned  Himself  to  be  a 
King,  for  it  was  but  speaking  the  truth.  (2.)  That  Pilate  might  learn 
the  innocence  and  candour  of  Jesus;  for  in  this  truth  consists. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


228 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XVIII. 


(3.)  To  remind  him  of  the  justice  with  which  he  ought  to  decide 
His  cause,  and  that  he  should  not  be  so  moved  by  the  false  charges 
and  clamours  of  the  Chief  Priests,  so  as  to  condemn  Him  against 
truth  and  justice. 

Every  one  that  is  of  the  truth  heareth  My  voice.  Those,  /.<?.,  who  are 
studious  and  desirous  of  the  truth  ; who  earnestly  and  with  their 
whole  heart  seek  the  Truth,  i.e.  the  true  God  and  the  true  Messiah, 
true  happiness  and  salvation.  And  who  when  they  have  found 
it  embrace  it  before  all  things  beside.  They  are  opposed  to  those 
who  are  “ of  contention  ” (Rom.  ii.  8),  who,  like  the  philosophers 
of  that  time,  are  ever  striving  to  contend,  dispute,  and  argue.  To  be, 
then,  “ of  the  truth  ” is  the  same  as  being  “ of  God.”  For  the  Son  of 
God  is  the  Son  of  the  Truth  ; for  God  is  truth,  according  to  John  viii. 
47,  “He  that  is  of  God  heareth  God’s  words.  Ye  therefore  hear 
them  not,  because  ye  are  not  of  God.”  Because,  though  ye  are  “ of 
God  ” by  creation,  yet  ye  are  not  “ of  Him  ” by  election,  faith,  and 
grace.  “ He  commended,”  says  S.  Augustine  (in  toe.),  “that  grace 
which  calls  according  to  His  purpose.”  For  he  that  hath  received 
his  testimony  (the  testimony  of  the  Baptist)  “ hath  set  to  his  seal  that 
God  is  true”  (John  iii.  33).  And  how  true  it  is,  is  shown  by  the 
statements  of  enemies.  For  Josephus  (Antiq.  xiv.  8)  writes,  “At 
that  time  lived  a wise  man  called  Jesus,  if  indeed  it  is  allowable  to 
call  Him  a man,  for  He  performed  wonderful  works,  and  taught 
those  who  willingly  received  the  truth.” 

Christ  tactily  answers  Pilate’s  objection,  viz.  “ If  Thou  bearest  wit- 
ness to  the  truth,  why  do  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  who  profess  the 
truth,  hear  Thee  not — nay  more,  persecute  Thee  even  to  the  death  ? ” 
He  answers,  “ Because  they  themselves  are  not  of  the  truth,  but  of 
a lie.  For  they  follow  the  false  opinions  of  wealth,  honours,  &c., 
which  the  devil  suggests  to  them.”  See  John  viii.  44. 

Ver.  34. — Pilate  saith  unto  Him , What  is  truth  l Pilate  supposed 
Christ  to  be  a philosopher  or  prophet,  who  speculated  about  truth. 
And  therefore  he  asked  Him  what  that  truth  was  to  which  He  was 
born  to  bear  witness.  But  this  was  not  much  to  the  point  which 
he  was  aiming  at,  viz.,  the  deliverance  of  Jesus,  who  was  a grave, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


WHAT  IS  TRUTH. 


229 


wise,  and  innocent  man.  And  therefore  he  thought  on  a very  fitting 
means  for  His  deliverance.  For  he  was  about  to  set  free  one  at 
the  feast ; and  therefore  compared  Jesus  and  Barabbas,  in  order 
that  the  Jews  should  rather  ask  for  Jesus  than  Barabbas.  He 
therefore  rushed  out  to  propose  it  to  them. 

Symbolically . What  is  truth  ? S.  Augustine  answers  (in  Senten- 
tice , 386),  “ Truth  is  God  Himself,  who  is  the  primal  source  of  life, 
and  the  primal  essence,  as  He  is  the  highest  wisdom.  For  He  is  that 
unchangeable  truth  which  is  rightly  termed  ‘the  law  of  all  arts,  and 
the  art  of  the  Almighty  Artificer. 1 ” And  also  (Epist.  ix.),  “The  truth 
held  by  Christians  is  incomparably  more  beautiful  than  Helen  of 
Greece.  For  our  martyrs  contended  more  boldly  in  its  behalf 
against  this  Sodom  of  ours,  than  these  heroes  fought  for  her  against 
Troy.”  Nay,  Christ  Himself  died  as  the  first  martyr  for  the  truth. 

What  is  truth  ? Hear  Lactantius  (dc  Ira  Dei,  cap.  ii.)  pointing 
out  its  three  steps.  (1.)  The  first  is  to  know  what  religions  are  false, 
and  to  cast  aside  the  impious  worship  of  gods  made  by  man’s  hands. 
(2.)  To  understand  that  there  is  one  supreme  God,  whose  power  and 
providence  created  the  world  at  the  first,  and  governed  it  afterwards. 
(3.)  To  recognise  His  minister  and  messenger  and  delegate  to  man. 
By  whose  teaching  we  shall  be  set  free  from  the  error  in  which  we 
were  entangled,  that  being  fashioned  for  the  worship  of  the  true  God 
we  might  learn  righteousness. 

What  is  truthl  “I  am  the  way,  the  Truth,  and  the  life.” 
(John  xiv.) 

What  is  truth  l It  is  the  very  highest  good,  says  S.  Basil  in 
Antonius,  surnamed  Melissa.* 

What  is  truth  f It  is  God,  says  S.  Dionysius,  “ inasmuch  as  He 
is  in  His  nature  one  only,  and  not  many.  For  the  truth  is  one — 
falsehood  is  manifold. 

What  is  truth  ? It  is  the  faculty  which  brings  to  the  light  things 
which  are  shrouded  in  darkness,  says  Philo. 

* Cornelius  says,  “ In  Melissa, ”as  though  it  were  the  name  of  a book.  Antonius, 
a Greek  monk,  was  called  Melissa  from  the  character  of  his  sermons.  The  book 
from  which  these  extracts  are  given  is  entitled  “ Loci  communes  de  Virtutibus  et 
Vitiis.”  He  lived  c.  1140.  See  Cave,  Hist.  Lit.  vol.  ii.  p.  219. 


Digitized  by  LjO©Qle 


230  S.  JOHN,  C.  XVIII. 

What  is  truth  ? The  mightiest  of  all  things,  says  Nazianzen 

m 

(i Orat . xiii.) 

What  is  truth  ? It  is  a firm  apprehension  of  an  object  in  the 
mind,  says  S.  Chrysostom.  Hence  the  saying  of  Zorobabel,  3 Esdr. 
iii.,  “ A king  is  strong,  wine  is  strong,  but  truth  is  strongest  of  all.” 
And  chap  iv.  36,  “ All  the  earth  invokes  truth,  heaven  also  blesses 
it,  and  all  things  are  moved  by,  and  tremble  at  it ; ” and  ver.  40, 
“ There  is  no  iniquity  in  its  judgment,  but  strength  and  sovereignty 
and  pcfwer,  and  the  majesty  of  all  ages.  Blessed  be  the  God  of 
truth.”  Accordingly,  Alphonso  King  of  Arragon  says,  “Truth 
ought  to  be  innate  in  all  men.  But  it  ought  to  be  the  chief  orna- 
ment of  kings,  so  that  a single  word  of  a prince  ought  to  be  of  as 
great  weight  for  settling  the  truth  as  the  oath  of  private  men.” 
(See  Panormitan.  de  Gestis  Alphonsi,  lib . 1.)  Hence  the  Jewish 
High  Priest  bore  written  on  his  breastplate  (rationali)  Urirn  and 
Thummim.  Exod.  xxviii.  30. 

The  Gentiles  saw  this  in  shadow  (Stobaeus,  Serm.  xi.),  and  Men- 
ander says,  Truth  is  a citizen  of  heaven,  and  alone  enjoys  converse 
with  the  gods. 

Plato  used  to  term  “ Truth  ” a most  sweet  mode  of  speech. 
Iamblicus  speaks  of  it  as  “ conversant  with  the  gods  and  their  purity 
of  action.”  ^Eschines,  “ So  mighty  is  truth,  that  it  transcends  all 
human  thought”  Plato  again  (de  Legg.  v.),  “ Truth  is  the  guide  to 
all  good  both  in  gods  and  men.  Every  one  who  would  hereafter 
be  good  and  happy  ought  to  have  a share  in  it,  in  order  to  live  as 
long  as  he  can  a life  of  truthfulness.”  Trismegistus,  “ Truth  exists 
only  in  eternal  subsistences ; and  those  subsistences  are  themselves 
true.  All  things  therefore  on  earth  are  not  truth  itself,  but  merely 
its  imitations  and  shadows.  Truth  is  the  most  perfect  virtue  and 
the  very  highest  good,  which  is  neither  disquieted  with  matter,  nor 
encompassed  with  a body,  but  is  pure,  conspicuous,  august,  un- 
changeable, and  unalterable  good.”  Plutarch  (in  Antonius,  cap . xxi.) 
says,  “ equality  is  tested  by  a balance,  but  truth  by  reasons  of  philo- 
sophy.” And  Evagrius  (ibid.),  “To  keep  back  the  truth  is  to  bury 
gold.”  And  Democritus,  “Piety  should  be  openly  declared,  and  truth 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


Loveliness  of  truth.  231 

stedfastly  defended.”  And  Epictetus,  “ Nothing  should  be  counted 
more  precious  than  truth,  not  even  friendship,  as  being  under  the 
influence  of  our  feelings,  which  hinder  what  is  just,  and  cast  it 
into  the  shade.”  Whence  the  saying,  “ Plato  is  dear,  but  truth  is 
dearer : ” and  also,  “ Truth  is  an  eternal  and  undying  thing,  for  it 
bestows  not  a beauty  which  will  gradually  fade,  nor  does  it  deprive 
us  of  that  confidence  which  arises  from  justice.  But  it  sets  forth 
those  things  which  are  just  and  rightful,  refuting  and  distinguishing 
from  them  those  which  are  unjust.”  Demosthenes  was  asked, 
" What  should  men  have  which  is  like  God  ? ” and  he  answered,  “ To 
act  kindly,  and  to  love  the  truth.”  (Val.  Max.  viii.) 

Pythagoras  used  to  say,  “ The  most  gracious  gifts  bestowed  by 
God  on  man,  were  to  embrace  the  truth,  and  to  devote  oneself  to 
acts  of  kindness  ; for  both  these  can  be  compared  with  the  actions 
of  the  immortal  gods.”  (/Elian,  Var,  Hist . lib,  xii.) 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


( 232  ) 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

I  The  scourging  of  Christ , His  crowning  with  thorns.  12  Pilate  gives  Him  up  to 
the  Jews , who  crucify  Him.  25  He  consigtts  His  mother  to  the  care  of  St, 
John . 2 8 Afar  words  from  the  cross , //&  death.  34  Afo  jwfc  pierced  by 

the  spear . 38  Joseph  of  Arimathcea  and  Hicodemus  bury  Him. 

THEN  Pilate  therefore  took  Jesus,  and  scourged  him. 

2  And  the  soldiers  platted  a crown  of  thorns,  and  put  it  on  his  head,  and 
they  put  on  him  a purple  robe, 

3  And  said,  Hail,  King  of  the  Jews  ! and  they  smote  him  with  their  hands. 

4  Pilate  therefore  went  forth  again,  and  saith  unto  them,  Behold,  I bring  him 
forth  to  you,  that  ye  may  know  that  I find  no  fault  in  him. 

5  Then  came  Jesus  forth,  wearing  the  crown  of  thorns  and  the  purple  robe. 
And  Pilate  saith  unto  them,  Behold  the  man  ! 

6  When  the  chief  priests  therefore  and  officers  saw  him,  they  cried  out,  saying, 
Crucify  him , crucify  him.  Pilate  saith  unto  them,  Take  ye  him,  and  crucify  him. 
for  I find  no  fault  in  him. 

7  The  Jews  answered  him,  We  have  a law,  and  by  our  law  he  ought  to  die, 
because  he  made  himself  the  Son  of  God. 

8  IT  When  Pilate  therefore  heard  that  saying,  he  was  the  more  afraid  ; 

9  And  went  again  into  the  judgment-hall,  and  saith  unto  Jesus,  Whence  art 
thou  ? But  Jesus  gave  him  no  answer. 

10  Then  saith  Pilate  unto  him,  Speakest  thou  not  unto  me?  knowest  thou 
not  that  I have  power  to  crucify  thee,  and  have  power  to  release  thee  ? 

II  Jesus  answered,  Thou  couldest  have  no  power  at  all  against  me,  except  it 
were  given  thee  from  above  : therefore  he  that  delivered  me  unto  thee  hath  the 
greater  sin. 

12  And  from  thenceforth  Pilate  sought  to  release  him  : but  the  Jews  cried  out, 
saying,  If  thou  let  this  man  go,  thou  art  not  Caesar’s  friend  : whosoever  maketh 
himself  a king  speaketh  against  Caesar. 

13  IT  When  Pilate  therefore  heard  that  saying,  he  brought  Jesus  forth,  and  sat 
down  in  the  judgment  seat  in  a place  that  is  called  the  Pavement,  but  in  the 
Hebrew,  Gabbatha. 

14  And  it  was  the  preparation  of  the  passover,  and  about  the  sixth  hour  : and 
he  saith  unto  the  Jews,  Behold  your  King  ! 

15  But  they  cried  out,  Away  with  himt  away  with  him , crucify  him.  Pilate 
saith  unto  them,  Shall  I crucify  your  King  ? The  chief  priests  answered,  We 
have  no  king  but  Caesar. 

16  Then  delivered  he  him  therefore  unto  them  to  be  crucified.  And  they  took 
Jesus,  and  led  him  away. 


Digitized  by  v^jooole 


THE  HOLY  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  JOHN.  233 

17  And  he  bearing  his  cross  went  forth  into  a place  called  the  place  of  a skull, 
which  is  called  in  the  Hebrew  Golgotha  : 

18  Where  they  crucified  him,  and  two  other  with  him,  on  either  side  one,  and 
Jesus  in  the  midst. 

19  IT  And  Pilate  wrote  a title,  and  put  it  on  the  cross.  And  the  writing  was, 
JESUS  OF  NAZARETH  THE  KING  OF  THE  JEWS. 

20  This  title  then  read  many  of  the  Jews  : for  the  place  where  Jesus  was  cruci- 
fied was  nigh  to  the  city  : and  it  was  written  in  Hebrew,  and  Greek,  and  Latin. 

21  Then  said  the  chief  priests  of  the  Jews  to  Pilate,  Write  not,  The  King  of 
the  Jews  ; but  that  he  said,  I am  King  of  the  Jews. 

22  Pilate  answered,  What  I have  written  I have  written. 

23  IT  Then  the  soldiers,  when  they  had  crucified  Jesus,  took  his  garments,  and 
made  four  parts,  to  every  soldier  a part ; and  also  his  coat : now  the  coat  was 
without  seam,  woven  from  the  top  throughout. 

24  They  said  therefore  among  themselves,  Let  us  not  rend  it,  but  cast  lots  for 
it,  whose  it  shall  be : that  the  scripture  might  be  fulfilled,  which  saith,  They 
parted  my  raiment  among  them,  and  for  my  vesture  they  did  cast  lots.  These 
things  therefore  the  soldiers  did. 

25  1 T Now  there  stood  by  the  cross  of  Jesus  his  mother,  and  his  mother’s  sister, 
Mary  the  wife  of  Cleophas,  and  Mary  Magdalene. 

26  When  Jesus  therefore  saw  his  mother,  and  the  disciple  standing  by  whom 
he  loved,  he  saith  unto  his  mother,  Woman,  behold  thy  son  ! 

27  Then  saith  he  to  the  disciple,  Behold  thy  mother  ! And  from  that  hour 
that  disciple  took  her  unto  his  own  home . 

28  IT  After  this,  Jesus  knowing  that  all  things  were  now  accomplished,  that 
the  scripture  might  be  fulfilled,  saith,  I thirst. 

29  Now  there  was  set  a vessel  full  of  vinegar : and  they  filled  a spunge  with 
vinegar,  and  put  it  upon  hyssop,  and  put  it  to  his  mouth. 

30  When  Jesus  therefore  had  received  the  vinegar,  he  said,  It  is  finished  : and 
he  bowed  his  head,  and  gave  up  the  ghost. 

31  The  Jews  therefore,  because  it  was  the  preparation,  that  the  bodies  should 
not  remain  upon  the  cross  on  the  sabbath  day  (for  that  sabbath  day  was  an  high 
day),  besought  Pilate  that  their  legs  might  be  broken,  and  that  they  might  be 
taken  away. 

32  Then  came  the  soldiers,  and  brake  the  legs  of  the  first,  and  of  the  other 
which  was  crucified  with  him. 

33  But  when  they  came  to  Jesus,  and  saw  that  he  was  dead  already,  they 
brake  not  his  legs  : 

34  But  one  of  the  soldiers  with  a spear  pierced  his  side,  and  forthwith  came 
thereout  blood  and  water, 

35  And  be  that  saw  it  bare  record,  and  his  record  is  true  ; and  he  knoweth 
that  he  saith  true,  that  ye  might  believe. 

36  For  these  things  were  done,  that  the  scripture  should  be  fulfilled,  A bone  of 
him  shall  not  be  broken. 

37  And  again  another  scripture  saith,  They  shall  look  on  him  whom  they 
pierced. 

38  H And  after  this  Joseph  of  Arimathaea,  being  a disciple  of  Jesus,  but  secretly 
for  fear  of  the  Jews,  besought  Pilate  that  he  might  take  away  the  body  of  Jesus  : 
and  Pilate  gave  him  leave.  He  came  therefore,  and  took  the  body  of  Jesus. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


234 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIX. 


39  And  there  came  also  Nicodemus,  which  at  the  first  came  to  Jesus  by  night, 
and  brought  a mixture  of  myrrh  and  aloes,  about  an  hundred  pound  weight . 

40  Then  took  they  the  body  of  Jesus,  and  wound  it  in  linen  clothes  with  the 
spices,  as  the  manner  of  the  Jews  is  to  bury. 

41  Now  in  the  place  where  he  was  crucified  there  was  a garden  ; and  in  the 
garden  a new  sepulchre,  wherein  was  never  man  yet  laid. 

42  There  laid  they  Jesus  therefore  because  of  the  Jews*  preparation  day;  for 
the  sepulchre  was  nigh  at  hand. 

Ver.  1. — Then  Pilate  therefore  took  Jesus  and  scourged  Him.  That  is 
after  he  had  said  (Luke  xxiii.  22),  “I  will  chastise  Him  and  let  Him  go.” 
The  tradition  is  that  He  was  first  scourged  with  thick  ropes,  then  with 
knotted  ropes  and  iron  scorpions,  then  with  chains,  and  lastly  with 
rods  of  thorns.  But  Ribera  says  that  these  traditions  are  of  little 
account,  as  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  have  so  often  changed, 
and  the  old  traditions  were  not  kept  up. 

Ver.  2. — And  they  put  on  Him  a purple  robe. — See  notes  on  S. 
Matt  xxvii.  30,  also  [Pseudo]  Athanasius,  de  Cruce , who  says  that 
Christ  bore  in  the  purple  robe  the  blood  of  men  (because  the  devil 
had  polluted  the  earth  with  murders),  in  the  thorns  their  sins,  in  the 
reed  the  hand-writing  with  which  the  devil  had  enrolled  us  as  his 
own ; for  all  these  Christ  took  away  by  His  Passion.  He  adds 
that  when  Christ  took  the  reed,  the  devil  armed  him  with  a 
weapon  against  himself,  for  the  reed  is  said  to  be  fatal  to  serpents, 
and  that  Christ  took  the  reed  to  deliver  us  from  the  serpent’s 
subtilty. 

Ver.  7. — He  ought  to  die , because  He  made  Himself  the  Son  of  God. 
As  being  a blasphemer,  sacrilegious,  and  opposed  to  God.  S.  Augus- 
tine says,  “ See  here  a greater  charge.  It  seemed  but  a light  thing 
that  He  had  aimed  at  sovereign  power : and  yet  He  did  not  falsely 
claim  anything ; for  He  is  the  Only  Begotten  Son  of  God,  and  is 
King  placed  by  Him  on  the  hill  of  Sion,  and  He  would  now  give 
proof  of  both,  unless,  the  more  powerful  He  was,  the  more  patient 
did  He  choose  to  be.” 

Ver.  11. — Thou  wouldest  have  no  power  against  Me , unless  it  were 
given  thee  from  above  : therefore  he  that  delivered  Me  unto  thee  hath  the 
greater  sin.  The  best  explanation  of  this  passage  is  that  of  Jansenius, 
Cajetan,  and  Ribera.  Thou  couldest  have  no  power  over  Me,  both 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  PASCHAL  SABBATH. 


235 


because  I am  innocent,  and  because  I could  deliver  Myself,  if  I so 
willed ; But  My  Father  willed  that  I should  submit  to  thee,  in  order 
to  the  work  of  redemption,  and  accordingly  permitted  thee  to  give 
way  to  the  Jews  in  this  matter,  and  to  exercise  thy  power  over 
Me.  But  this  thou  wouldest  not  have  done,  unless  they  had  accused 
Me.  Their  sin  is  therefore  greater  than  thine. 

Ver.  12. — And  from  thenceforth  Pilate  sought  to  release  Him . He 
had  sought  to  do  so  before.  But  he  now  more  especially  did  so, 
after  he  had  heard  that  He  was  the  Son  of  God ; fearing  to  incur 
the  vengeance  of  God  on  condemning  Him.  The  fear  of  Caesar, 
however,  prevailed  over  the  fear  of  God.  The  Gentiles  reckoned 
many  sons  of  the  gods,  whom  they  worshipped  as  demigods.  See 
S.  Cyril  in  loc. 

Ver.  13. — In  a place  that  was  called  the  Pavement , but  in  the 
Hebrew  Gabbatha.  That  is  a High  Place,  the  seat  of  judgment, 
being  raised  on  many  steps.  These  steps  were  sent  to  Rome,  and 
placed  near  the  Church  of  S.  John  Lateran.  They  are  much 
reverenced  by  the  faithful. 

Ver.  14. — It  was  the  preparation  of  the  Passover . That  is  of  the 
Paschal  Sabbath,  the  Sabbath  which  fell  in  the  octave.  On  this  day 
great  preparations  were  made  for  the  following  Sabbath,  on  which 
no  work  could  be  done.  This  was  the  only  Sabbath  which  had  its 
preparation-day.  The  Greeks  explain  it  as  being  the  day  before 
the  offering  of  the  Paschal  Lamb.  But  according  to  the  other 
Evangelists  Christ  was  crucified  on  the  day  after  the  Passover, 
which  S.  John  terms  the  day  before  the  Paschal  Sabbath. 

About  the  sixth  hour  That  is,  says  the  Arabic  version,  six  hours 
after  sunrise.  S.  Mark  says  it  was  the  third  hour.  Some  consider 
that  S.  John  should  here  be  corrected  by  S.  Mark.  But  all  the 
MS.  and  versions  read  “ the  sixth  hour.” 

2.  S.  Jerome  (on  Ps.  lxxvii.)  thinks  that  S.  Mark  should  be 
corrected  by  S.  John.  But  here  all  the  MS.  of  S.  Mark  agree  in 
reading  the  third  hour. 

3.  Euthymius  (on  Mark  xv.)  thinks  that  S.  Mark  mentions  the 
third  hour,  because  it  was  at  that  hour  that  the  Jews  demanded  His 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


236  S.  JOHN,  C.  XIX. 

death.  But  to  demand  His  death,  and  actually  to  crucify  Him,  are 
very  different  things. 

4.  S.  Augustine  says  that  it  was  the  sixth  hour  from  the  time 
that  Jesus  was  preparing  for  death,  i.e.  the  ninth  of  the  previous 
night  But  this  is  a somewhat  “violent”  mode  of  solving  the 
difficulty  {see  S.  Aug . in  loc.  in  Ps.  Ixiiu  and  de  Consens.  Evang. 
iii.  13) ; and  he  says  himself — 

5.  That  it  was  in  the  third  hour  in  the  Jewish  language,  but  at 
the  sixth  hour  in  the  Latin  tongue,  and  in  Pilate's  sentence. 

6.  It  was  at  the  end  of  the  third  hour,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the 
sixth,  the  Roman  and  Jewish  hours  or  watches  being  three  of  ours. 

7.  Ribera  thinks  it  probable  that  at  the  third  hour  Pilate  yielded 
to  the  clamour  of  the  Jews,  but  that  at  the  sixth  hour  the  formal 
sentence  was  passed.  S.  Mark  indicates  the  preparation  for  cruci- 
fixion, S.  John  the  completion  and  carrying  out  of  the  sentence. 

Ver.  15. — We  have  no  king  but  Ceesar.  “They  rejected  the 
Lamb,  they  preferred  the  fox,”  to  be  their  king,  says  CassiodoruSk 
See  Luke  xiii.  32,  “Go  ye  and  tell  that  fox.” 

Ver.  17. — Bearing  His  cross . After  the  Roman  custom.  S. 
Augustine  writes,  “A  noble  spectacle  : a great  jest  for  the  ungodly, 
but  a great  mystery  to  the  godly;  a great  mark  of  disgrace  to 
the  wicked,  a great  evidence  of  faith  to  the  godly;  ungodliness, 
as  it  looks  on,  laughs  at  a King  bearing  His  cross  of  punishment 
instead  of  His  sceptre : while  the  godly  behold  a King  bearing  the 
cross  on  which  He  was  to  be  nailed,  and  which  He  would  after- 
wards fix  on  the  brows  of  kings ; scorned  in  the  eyes  of  the  ungodly 
for  that  very  thing  in  which  the  hearts  of  the  saints  would  thereafter 
glory.”  Gal.  vi.  14. 

Ver.  23. — But  His  coat  was  without  seam , woven  from  the  top 
throughout  Euthymius  says  it  was  said  to  have  been  woven  by  the 
Blessed  Virgin. 

Allegorically . This  was  a type  of  Christ's  Church,  which  it  is  not 
lawful  to  rend,  and  thus  cause  a schism. 

Tropologically.  S.  Bernard  regards  it  as  the  Divine  Image,  so 
implanted  and  impressed  on  nature  that  it  cannot  be  torn  asunder. 


Digitized  by  ynOQQle 


B.  V.  M.  MORE  THAN  MARTYR. 


237 


Ver.  25. — But  there  stood  by  the  cross  of  Jesus  His  mother,  and 
His  mother’s  sister  (cousin),  Mary  the  wife  of  Cleophas  (and  the 
mother  of  S.  James  the  Less  and  Jude),  and  Mary  Magdalene \ who 
was  the  more  enkindled  with  love  for  Jesus,  when  she  saw  Him 
washing  away  with  His  Blood  those  very  sins  which  she  had  just 
washed  away  with  her  tears.  Christ  wished  it  so  to  be,  that  He 
might  suffer  the  more  by  witnessing  the  sorrows  of  His  mother,  and 
that  she  by  sharing  His  sufferings  might  give  us  a perfect  example 
of  patience  and  charity:  as  Damascene  says  (Lib.  iv.  13),  “The 
pangs  of  child-birth  which  she  escaped  she  suffered  at  the  time  of 
His  Passion,  by  her  motherly  compassion,  bearing  Him  afresh 
in  beholding  His  wounds.”  For  the  holier  she  was,  and  the  nearer 
to  Christ,  the  larger  was  the  cup  of  suffering  which  He  offered  her. 
Euthymius  states  that  she  stood  quite  close  to  the  cross,  her  ardent 
love  overmastering  her  fear  of  the  Jews.  She  stood  therefore  firm 
and  erect  in  her  body,  more  erect  in  her  mind,  looking  and  wonder- 
ing at  this  great  mystery  of  godliness,  God  hanging  on  the  cross. 
Hence  Sophronius  (S  Jerome . Serm . de  Assump .)  calls  the  Blessed 
Virgin  a martyr ; nay,  more  than  a martyr,  “ Because,”  he  says,  “ she 
suffered  in  her  mind.  Her  love  indeed  was  stronger  than  death, 
because  she  made  the  death  of  Christ  her  own.”  And  S. 
Ildephonsus  (Serm.  ii.  de  Assumpt.)f  u She  was  more  than  a martyr, 
because  there  was  in  her  no  less  love  than  sorrow.  She  was 
wounded  with  a sword  within,  for  she  stood  prepared,  though  the 
hand  to  smite  her  was  wanting.  And  she  was  rightly  more  than  a 
martyr,  for,  wounded  with  overpowering  love,  she  witnessed  His 
death,  and  in  her  inward  grief  she  bare  the  torture  of  the 
Passion.” 

S.  Anselm  (de  Excell.  Virg.  cap . v.)  says,  “ Whatever  cruelty  was 
inflicted  on  the  bodies  of  the  martyrs,  was  light  or  rather  nothing  in 
comparison  with  thy  suffering,  which  in  its  very  immensity  pierced 
through  to  the  inmost  parts  of  thy  most  tender  heart  And  I could 
not  believe  that  thou  couldest  endure  such  cruel  tortures  without 
losing  thy  life,  unless  the  spirit  of  life  itself,  the  spirit  of  consola- 
tion, the  spirit  of  thy  most  loving  Son,  for  whose  death  thou  wast 


Digitized  by 


Google 


238 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIX. 


then  in  torture,  taught  thee  within  that  it  was  not  death  that  was 
destroying  Him,  but  rather  a triumph  which  was  bringing  all  things 
under  Him,  which  thou  didst  behold  when  He  was  dying  in  thy 
sight " 

S.  Bernard  ( Lamen . B.  Maria)  says,  “ No  tongue  can  speak,  nor 
mind  imagine,  how  the  tender  feelings  of  the  Virgin  were  affected 
with  sorrow.  Now,  O Virgin,  thou  payest  with  interest  that 
natural  suffering  which  thou  hadst  not  in  childbirth.  Thou  didst 
not  feel  pain  at  thy  Son's  birth,  but  thou  sufferedst  a thousand-fold 
more  at  His  death."  S.  Mechtildis  relates  a vision  in  which  she 
saw  a seraph  saluting  the  Blessed  Virgin  on  account  of  the  great 
love  she  had  to  God  above  all  other  creatures,  which  was  especially 
manifested  in  the  Passion  of  her  Son,  when  she  kept  down  all  her 
human  feelings,  and  rejoiced  that  He  was  willing  to  die  for  the 
salvation  of  the  world. 

John  Gerson  (in  Magnify  says  that  she  manifested  the  highest 
obedience  in  offering  up  her  Son  to  the  Father,  conforming  herself 
therein  to  the  Divine  will.  He  compares  her  to  the  mother  of  the 
Maccabees,  to  S.  Felicitas,  and  to  S.  Symphorosa,  who  encouraged 
their  sons  to  suffer  martyrdom  for  the  faith. 

S.  Bridget  describes  the  intense  grief  of  the  Virgin  (Revel,  i.  cap. 
io,  27,  25  and  iv.  cap.  23  and  70).  His  “sorrow  was  my  sorrow," 
she  said,  " for  His  heart  was  my  heart.” 

Adrichomius  (Descript.  Jerusalem ) mentions  the  exact  spot  where 
she  stood  near  the  cross,  a spot  now  much  honoured  (he  says)  by 
the  pious  veneration  of  the  faithful. 

A question  is  here  discussed  whether  the  Blessed  Virgin  reasoned 
at  seeing  her  Son  on  the  cross.  Authorities  are  given  on  both  sides, 
the  greater  part  maintaining  that  she  did  not,  grounding  their  opinion 
on  her  entire  conformity  to  the  Divine  will,  and  her  own  con- 
stancy and  resolution,  suffering  rather  in  her  mind  than  in  her 
senses  and  feelings. 

Salmeron  (Lib.  x.  tract  41)  thinks  that  she  swooned  at  first,  and 
then  recovered  and  stood  by  the  cross  : and  that  her  swoon  did  not 
deprive  her  of  her  reason,  but  took  away  her  senses  for  a while. 


gitized  by 


S.  MARY  AT  THE  CROSS. 


239 


He  adds  that  she  suffered  thus  of  her  own  accord,  to  testify  to  men 
her  exceeding  love  for  Him,  and  her  exceeding  sorrow.  Just  as 
Christ  voluntarily  underwent  His  agony  in  the  garden.  Both  had 
perfect  control  over  their  feelings,  just  as  Adam  had  before  he  fell 

S.  Ambrose  (de  Instit  Virginum , cap.  vii.)  thus  writes,  “ The 
mother  stood  before  the  cross,  and  when  men  fled  she  remained 
intrepid.  See  whether  the  mother  of  Jesus  could  put  off  her 
modesty,  who  put  not  aside  her  courage.  She  looked  with  loving 
eyes  on  the  wounds  of  her  Son,  through  whom  she  knew  that  the 
Redemption  of  all  men  would  come.  She  stood,  no  ignoble 
spectacle,  since  she  feared  not  the  murderer.  The  Son  was  hang- 
ing on  the  Cross,  the  mother  offered  herself  to  the  persecutors,  as 
not  being  ignorant  of  the  mystery,  that  she  had  borne  one  who 
would  rise  again.”  And  S.  Athanasius  : “ Mary  stood  most  firmly 
and  most  patiently  in  her  faith  in  Jesus.  For  when  the  disciples 
fled,  and  all  men  held  aloof  from  Him,  to  the  glory  of  the  whole  of 
her  sex,  amidst  the  countless  sufferings  of  her  Son,  she  alone 
remained  firm  and  constant  in  her  faith,  and  indeed  was  a beauteous 
sight,  as  became  her  Virgin  modesty.  She  did  not  disfigure  her- 
self in  the  great  and  bitter  sorrow.  She  reviled  not,  she  murmured 
not,  she  asked  not  from  God  for  vengeance  on  her  enemies.  But 
she  stood  as  a well-disciplined  modest  virgin,  most  patiently,  full  of 
tears,  immersed  in  grief.” 

She  was  indeed  so  strengthened  on  beholding  the  blessed  wounds 
of  her  Son  as  to  be  ready,  says  S.  Ambrose  (in  Luke  xxiii.)  herself 
to  die  for  the  salvation  of  the  world.  For  in  faith,  strength,  and 
warmth  of  charity  she  was  not  inferior  to  Abraham,  who  was  willing 
at  God’s  command  to  offer  up  his  son  Isaac  with  his  own  hand. 
Besides  this,  her  sure  belief  in  His  resurrection  alleviated  her  sorrow 
and  strengthened  her  resolution.  She  knew  that  He  would  rise  on 
the  third  day. 

Ver.  26. — When  Jesus  therefore  saw  His  Mother , and  His  disciple 
standing  by  whom  He  loved , He  saith  unto  His  Mother , Woman , 
behold  thy  son  l Christ  pierced  her  heart  with  the  wound  both  of 
love  and  sorrow,  for  He  meant,  Mother,  I am,  as  thou  seest,  dying 


Digitized  by  boogie 


240 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIX. 


on  the  Cross : I shall  not  be  able  to  be  with  thee,  to  attend  to  thee, 
to  provide  for  thee,  and  assist  thee  as  I have  hitherto  done.  I 
assign  to  thee,  in  my  place,  John  to  be  thy  son  ; a man  in  the  place 
of  God,  a disciple  for  a master,  an  adopted  son  instead  of  thine 
own  by  nature ; in  order  that  he,  as  a virgin,  and  most  beloved  by 
thee  as  the  Virgin  Mother  of  God,  may  bestow  on  thee  all  the 
solace,  and  all  the  devotion,  which  both  thy  dignity  and  thy 
advancing  age  demand,  and  which  the  zeal  and  love  of  John 
promises  and  assures  to  thee.  Christ  therefore  here  teaches  that 
children  should  care  for  their  parents  even  to  the  last,  says  Theo- 
phylact  from  S.  Chrysostom.  Hear  S.  Augustine : “ Here  is  a 
passage  of  moral  teaching.  Our  good  Teacher  instructed  His  own 
by  His  own  example,  that  pious  children  should  have  a care  for 
their  parents;  as  if  that  wood  on  which  His  limbs  were  fastened 
when  He  was  dying,  were  also  the  chair  of  the  teacher.”  For,  as 
S.  Cyril  says,  “ We  ought  to  learn  from  Him,  and  through  Him, 
first  of  all,  that  parents  must  not  be  neglected,  even  when  intoler- 
able sufferings  are  hanging  over  us.”  “But  wonder,  with  Theo- 
phylact,  at  the  calmness  with  which  He  does  everything  on  the 
cross ; caring  for  His  mother,  fulfilling  prophecies,  promising  para- 
dise to  the  thief;  but  before  He  came  to  it,  how  burdened  was  He, 
pouring  forth  His  sweat,  and  full  of  trouble.”  For,  as  Euthymius 
says,  “ in  the  one  case  the  weakness  of  nature  was  seen,  in  the  other 
His  great  power  of  endurance.”  Christ  commends  His  mother  to 
S.  John,  whom  at  the  same  time  He  put  in  His  own  place  as  her 
son,  that  thus  they  might  have  a mutual  care  for  each  other. 
[Pseudo]-Cyprian  (Dt  Passiotie  Christi)  gives  the  reasons  for  this. 
First,  to  provide  for  His  mother,  who  was  now  waxing  old,  the  care 
and  kind  offices  of  a son.  As  if  He  said,  “ I am  dying.  I cannot 
care  for  thee  any  more,  I resign  thee  into  the  hands  of  John.” 
Secondly,  that  He  might  commend  a Virgin  to  a Virgin.  “ The 
pure  is  entrusted  to  the  pure,”  says  Theophylact.  As  Nonnus  para- 
phrases it : “ O Mother,  thou  lover  of  virginity,  behold  thy  virgin 
son ; and  on  the  other  hand  He  said  to  His  disciple,  O thou  lover 
of  virginity,  Behold  a virgin  who  is  thy  parent,  without  giving  thee 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


$.  MARY  AND  S.  JOHN 


24I 


birth.”  And  S.  Ambrose  ( de  Instit  Virgin)  says,  " But  with  whom 
should  the  Virgin  dwell,  rather  than  with  him,  whom  she  knew  to 
be  the  heir  of  her  Son,  and  the  guardian  of  her  chastity  ? ” And 
in  this  matter  Jesus,  as  anxious  for  her  purity,  wished  that  her  con- 
tinuance in  this  state  (as  a mother  and  yet  a Virgin)  should  be  fully 
proved.  As  S.  Ambrose  writes  (ibid.),  “that  no  one  should  cast  on 
her  the  reproach  of  having  lost  her  purity.” 

Thirdly,  To  show  that  Joseph  was  not  His  father,  He  set  him 
aside,  and  put  John  in  his  place.  Hear  [Pseudo ]-Cyprian  : “Thou 
carefully  providest  for  her  who  was  Blessed  among  women,  the  pro- 
tection of  an  Apostle,  and  Thou  deliverest  the  care  of  the  Virgin  to 
a Virgin-disciple  ; in  order  that  Joseph  might  be  no  longer  burdened 
with  the  charge  of  so  great  a mystery,  but  that  John  should  bear  it. 
For  reason  now  demanded  that  he  should  no  longer  be  regarded  as 
her  husband,  nor  be  counted  the  father  of  Christ,  who  had  hitherto 
held  the  place  of  father  and  husband.”  He  then  meets  a tacit 
objection.  “ Joseph  would  have  had  good  reason  to  object  to  this 
arrangement  of  Christ  had  he  regarded  himself  as  a husband  in  the 
flesh.  But  because  the  mystery  of  that  union  was  spiritual,  he 
allowed  John  to  be  preferred  to  himself  in  this  office,  as  being  more 
worthy,  and  more  especially  because  the  Master’s  choice  had  so 
ordered  it.” 

This  rests  on  the  supposition  that  Joseph  was  then  alive.  But 
most  commentators,  and  with  greater  probability,  think  otherwise. 
For  no  mention  whatever  is  made  of  him,  and  Christ  seems  to  have 
commended  His  mother  to  the  care  of  John,  because  Joseph  was 
dead.  For  had  he  been  alive,  Christ  would  certainly  have  com- 
mitted His  mother  to  his  care,  as  He  had  done  at  His  Incarnation 
and  Nativity,  and  as  having  had  experience  of  his  fidelity  and  care 
in  the  flight  into  Egypt,  and  at  other  times. 

Fourthly,  John  alone  remained  fearlessly  and  firmly  with  Mary  at 
the  cross,  amidst  all  the  insolence  and  reviling  of  the  Jews.  He 
therefore  deserved  to  be  adopted  by  Jesus  as  His  brother,  and  to 
be  put  in  His  room  as  the  son  of  the  Virgin  Mother.  Moreover, 

Christ  commended,  in  the  person  of  S.  John,  the  rest  of  the  Apostles, 
VOL.  v.  Q 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIX. 


242 

nay  all  the  faithful,  to  His  mother,  especially  those  who  are  chaste 
and  virgins,  and  follow  most  closely  Christ  on  His  Cross,  and  thus 
become  most  beloved  and  most  closely  joined  to  Christ,  just  as  was 
S.  John,  who  was  called  by  [Pseudoj-Cyprian  His  chamber-fellow. 

Whom  He  loved.  To  whom  He  exhibited  greater  external  tokens 
of  love,  as  being  younger  than  the  other  Apostles,  more  modest  and 
chaste,  and  loving  Him  more  than  did  the  rest. 

Woman , behold  Thy  Son  ! He  calls  her  woman,  not  mother,  “ lest 
that  loved  name  should  wound  the  mother’s  heart,1 ” as  Baptist  of 
Mantua  says : not  to  rouse  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  against  her ; to 
show  that  He  had  put  off  all  human  affections,  that  He  resigned  all 
human  relationships,  and  wished  to  teach  their  abandonment ; and 
lastly,  to  arouse  her  courage  and  strength  of  mind  to  bear  all  these 
things  with  fortitude,  and  to  remind  her  of  that  resolute  woman 
whom  Solomon  had  foretold  (Prov.  xxxi.  1).  For  the  Blessed  Virgin 
suffered  for  a longer  time  than  Christ.  His  suffering  ceased  at  His 
death.  Her  suffering  and  compassion  increased  more  and  more. 
For  she  received  His  body  when  taken  down  from  the  cross,  thus 
reviving  her  grief ; and  for  the  three  days  He  lay  in  the  tomb,  His 
sufferings  on  the  cross,  which  she  had  witnessed  close  at  hand, 
remained  vividly  impressed  on  her  mind,  and  gave  it  pain,  till  Christ 
rose  again,  and  removed  them  all  by  the  consolations  and  glory  of 
His  appearing.  Again,  the  Blessed  Virgin  was  left  behind  Him,  to  be 
the  mother  of  the  Apostles  and  the  faithful,  to  gather  them  together 
again,  to  comfort  the  afflicted,  to  support  the  stumbling,  to  advise 
the  doubting  and  anxious,  and  through  all  trials  direct,  instruct,  and 
animate  them. 

This  Cornelius  illustrates  from  various  ecclesiastical  writers.  He 
quotes  also  the  very  strong  expressions  used  towards  B.  V.  M.  in 
the  Litanies  of  the  Church.  And  much  stronger  language  of  S. 
Bernard  ( Serm . iv.  de  Assumptione , and  Horn.  iv.  on  the  text 
“Missus  est”  (Luke  i.  26),  and  Horn.  ii.  on  Pentecost , and  several 
other  passages  of  the  like  character). 

Ver.  27. — Then  saith  tie  to  His  disciple , Behold  thy  mother  l Love 
her,  attend  to  her,  help  her,  as  thy  mother.  And,  on  the  other 


-Digitized-by-1 


Google 


BEHOLD  THY  MOTHER. 


243 


hand,  betake  thyself  to  her,  as  thy  mother  in  every  difficulty, 
temptation,  persecution,  and  affliction.  She  will  cherish  thee  with 
motherly  affection,  will  console  and  protect  thee,  and  ask  help  for 
thee  from  her  Son.  And  these  words  of  Christ  are  not  mere  lip 
words,  and  without  effect,  like  those  of  men : but  as  the  words  of 
God  they  are  real  and  efficacious,  and  effect  that  which  they  declare. 
And  accordingly  they  impressed  on  S.  John  a filial  affection  and 
spirit  towards  the  Blessed  Virgin,  as  though  she  were  his  mother. 
Theophylact  exclaims,  “ How  wonderful ! how  doth  He  honour  His 
disciple,  in  making  him  His  brother?  How  good  is  it  to  stand  by 
the  cross,  and  to  abide  close  to  Christ  in  His  sufferings  ! ” And  S. 
Chrysostom  : “ What  honour  does  He  confer  on  His  disciple  ! Fot 
when  He  was  about  to  depart  He  left  the  care  of  His  mother  to  His 
disciple.  For  when  it  was  natural  for  her  to  sorrow  as  His  mother, 
and  to  seek  for  protection,  He  most  fitly  commends  her  to  His 
beloved  disciple,  to  whom  He  says,  ‘ Behold  thy  mother  ! ’ that  so 
they  might  be  bound  together  in  love.” 

Behold  thy  mother!  And  the  mother  also  of  thy  fellow- Apostles. 
Accordingly  all  the  faithful  (as  S.  Bernard  teaches)  should  betake 
themselves  to  her  with  full  confidence  and  love.  She  is  the  Eve  of 
the  faithful,  the  mother  of  all  living,  to  whom  the  wise  and  Saints 
of  every  age  betake  themselves. 

Hear  S.  Augustine  : “ When  He  said  these  words,  these  two 
beloved  ones  ceased  not  to  shed  tears ; they  were  both  silent,  for 
they  could  not  speak  for  excessive  grief;  these  two  virgins  heard 
Christ  speaking,  and  saw  Him  gradually  dying : they  wept  bitterly,  for 
they  sorrowed  bitterly,  for  the  sword  of  His  sorrow  pierced  through 
both  their  hearts.” 

And  (/>.,  therefore,  because  Jesus  had  ordered  it)  that  disciple 
took  her  unto  his  own  (sua).  Some  read  suam , his  own  house, 
as  Nonnus  paraphrases  it  Bede  suggests,  for  his  own  mother, 
or  better  still,  into  his  own  charge.  As  S.  Augustine  says, 
“not  into  his  own  hands,  but  into  those  kind  offices,  which  he 
undertook  to  dispense.”  S.  John  accordingly  took  her  with  him  to 
Ephesus,  and  the  Council  of  Ephesus  (cap.  xxvi.  Synodical  Epistle) 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


244 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIX. 


says  that  they  both  for  a time  lived  at  Ephesus.  ( See  Christopher 
Castro  in  Hist . Deiparce.) 

This  then  was  Christ’s  testament,  and  John  was  the  executor.  As 
S.  Ambrose  says  on  Luke  xxiii.,  “ He  executed  His  testament  on 
the  cross  and  John  witnesses  to  it,  a fitting  witness  for  so  great  a 
testator.”  Gather  from  this  also  that  Joseph  was  dead.  As  S. 
Ambrose  says  (ibid.),  “The  wife  would  not  be  devorced  from  her 
husband,  but  she  who  veiled  the  mystery  under  the  guise  of  marriage, 
now,  when  this  mystery  was  finished,  no  longer  had  need  of  wedlock.” 
And  Epiphanius  (Her.  lxxviii.)  says,  “ if  she  had  had  a husband,  or 
a home  or  children  of  her  own,  she  would  have  retired  to  them,  and 
not  to  a stranger.”  See  then  how  poor  the  Blessed  Virgin  was,  and 
how  devoted  to  poverty. 

Ver.  28. — After  this , Jesus  knowing  that  all  things  were  now  accom- 
plished, that  the  scripture  might  be  fulfilled,  saith,  I thirst.  After  about 
three  hours.  It  was  at  the  beginning  of  the  crucifixion  that  He 
commended  His  mother  to  S.  John.  The  scripture  was  Ps. 
lxix.  22.  He  said  this  that  He  might  suffer  the  further  torment  of 
being  offered  the  vinegar.  As  S.  Augustine  says,  “ Ye  have  not  yet 
done  this.  Give  Me  that  which  ye  are  yourselves — for  ye  are  full  of 
acidity  and  bitterness  ; give  Me  vinegar,  and  not  wine.” 

Christ  thirsted,  because  He  had  neither  eaten  nor  drunken  since 
His  supper  the  night  before,  and  He  had  moreover  poured  forth  all 
the  moisture  and  blood  in  His  body,  by  His  scourging  and  cruci- 
fixion. And  His  most  bitter  pains  also  caused  Him  great  thirst ; 
for,  as  S.  Cyril  says,  “ Sorrows  enkindle  the  heat  within  us,  dry  up 
our  moisture  from  its  very  depths,  and  burn  us  up  with  fiery  heat.” 
Hence  our  jaws  are  dried  up,  and  are  parched  with  thirst.  The 
words  of  the  Psalmist  (xxii.  6)  were  fulfilled  in  Christ’s  person. 
The  Chancellor  of  Louvain,  when  he  was  dying  forty  years  ago,  said 
in  my  presence,  that  he  never  fully  understood  those  words,  as  he 
did  when  he  was  himself  suffering  from  like  drought  and  thirst,  and 
thence  learned  how  great  the  thirst  of  Christ  was.  Mystically,  Christ 
thirsted  for  the  salvation  of  souls.  See  Bellarmine  on  “The  seven 
words  of  Christ  on  the  cross.”  “ God  thirsteth  to  be  thirsted  for,”  says 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


JESUS  THIRSTS. 


245 


Nazianzen  in  Tetrastichisis , in  order  that  we  may  insatiably  love  and 
desire  Him,  and  say  with  the  Psalmist,  “ My  soul  is  athirst  for  God, 
yea,  even  for  the  living  God  : when  shall  I come  to  appear  before 
the  presence  of  God  ? ” Ps.  xlii.  2. 

Ver.  30. — When  Jesus  therefore  had  received  the  vinegar , He  said. 
It  is  finished:  and  He  bowed  His  head , and  gave  up  the  ghost  All 
the  suffering  and  all  the  mysteries  which  the  Father  decreed  from 
all  eternity  that  I should  suffer  and  carry  out,  as  He  ordered  from 
My  very  birth,  and  willed,  moreover,  that  the  prophets  should  foretell 
concerning  Me.  There  remains  only  the  final  issue  of  death,  to 
complete  My  course  of  suffering,  to  expiate  thereby  the  penalty  of 
death,  which  Adam  incurred  by  sin,  and  to  restore  mankind  to  life. 

I therefore  embrace  it,  and  resign  My  spirit  into  the  hands  of  My 
Father.  (Matt,  xxvii.  48,  seq.) 

Christ  spake  seven  words  on  the  cross,  three  recorded  by  S.  John, 
the  four  others  by  the  other  Evangelists. 

Ver.  31. — The  Jews  therefore  (because  it  was  the  preparation)  that 
the  bodies  should  not  remain  on  the  a‘Oss  on  the  sabbath  day  (for 
that  sabbath-day  was  an  high  day)  besought  Pilate  that  their  legs 
might  be  broken,  and  that  they  might  be  taken  away . See  Deut.  xxL 
22.  This  was  done,  in  order  that  they  might  not  pollute  and  make 
gloomy  this  most  solemn  festival,  by  the  horror  of  their  sufferings, 
as  St.  Augustine  says.  It  was  necessary  therefore  that  they  should 
die  and  be  buried  before  sunset,  at  which  time  the  sabbath  began. 
“ That,”  as  Theophylact  says,  “ the  sun  might  not  set  on  their 
sufferings.” 

For  this  was  the  sabbath  within  the  octave  of  the  Passover,  and 
for  this  reason  a more  solemn  day  than  other  sabbaths. 

Their  legs  were  to  be  broken  with  the  strong  blows  of  a mallet 
or  iron  bar,  to  make  them  die  the  sooner,  from  ^he  intensity  of  the 
pain,  or  the  loss  of  blood,  or  because  the  vital  force  resides  in  the 
knees  and  legs.  (See  Pliny , N H.  xi.  45.) 

But  why  did  they  not  pierce  their  hearts  with  a spear  or  sword, 
which  would  have  been  an  easier  and  a quicker  death  ? They  pre- 
ferred to  break  the  legs  of  criminals,  in  order  to  increase  their  suffer- 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


246 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIX. 


ings,  as  even  now  notorious  criminals  are  put  on  the  rack.  Probably 
the  Jews  wished  to  do  this  to  Christ,  out  of  bitter  hatred,  and  Baron ius 
thinks  that  they  gave  Him  vinegar  to  keep  Him  alive  for  this  further 
torture.  But  He  was  already  dead,  not  because  He  dreaded  this 
further  suffering,  but  on  account  of  the  mystery  (of  which  more 
presently),  but  also  because  His  strength  was  worn  out  by  all  He 
had  already  undergone.  (See  Lipsius , de  Cruce,  ii.  14.) 

These  Jews  seemed  to  urge  their  being  taken  down  from  the  cross, 
not  so  much  from  any  regard  for  the  sabbath,  as  from  dread,  shame, 
and  consciousness  of  guilt.  For  they  saw  the  sun  darkened,  the 
veil  of  the  temple  rent,  the  earthquake,  &c.,  all  which  condemned 
their  treatment  of  Christ.  And  they  therefore  feared  either  that  God 
would  punish  them,  or  the  people  rise  up  against  them  as  the  mur- 
derers of  Christ.  They  ordered  Him  therefore  to  be  taken  down 
from  His  seat  of  triumph,  and  to  be  buried.  See  F.  -Lucas. 

Ver.  33. — But  when  they  came  to  Jesus  (evidently  to  break  His 
legs.  Euthymius  says,  “They  came  to  Him  last,  as  wishing  to  please 
the  Jews  by  treating  Him  with  greater  insult)  and  saw  that  He  was 
dead  already,  they  brake  not  His  legs.  He  did  not  wish  His  legs  to 
be  broken,  for  He  wished  to  rise  again  with  an  unmutilated  body. 
As  Lactantius  says  (iv.  26),  “ His  body  is  taken  down  from  the 
cross  entire,  and  carefully  laid  in  the  tomb,  lest  by  the  loss  of  any 
limb  it  might  be  rendered  less  seemly  for  resurrection.” 

Instead,  then,  of  His  legs  being  broken,  His  side  was  pierced  with 
the  spear.  This  was  after  He  was  dead,  not  while  He  was  alive,  as  some 
have  thought.  This  error  was  condemned  in  the  Council  of  Vienne. 
For  as  Christ,  while  alive,  gave  up  His  whole  Body  for  us,  so  did 
He  in  His  death  wish  to  give  us  His  heart.  For  this  it  was  that 
was  pierced  by  the  spear,  and  blood  and  water  flowed  forth  from  it, 
so  that  He  gave  Hfcnself  entirely  to  us. 

You  will  say  that  Christ  was  already  dead,  and  that  therefore  He 
merited  nothing  by  this  piercing  of  His  heart.  But  I reply  that 
when  alive  He  knew  this  wound  would  be  inflicted,  and  that  He 
offered  it  to  the  Father  for  us,  and  thus  merited  and  effected  our 
salvation.  Thou  wilt  say  next,  We  see  that  blood  flows  from  the 


Digitized  by  V joogle 


THE  PIERCED  SIDE.  247 

body  of  a slain  person,  if  the  murdeeer  is  present.  This  then  is  a 
natural  effect.  I say  that  it  is  not  natural,  but  very  nearly  miracu- 
lous ; to  point  out  and  confound  the  murderer.  And  much  more 
was  it  miraculous  in  the  case  of  Christ,  as  I will  presently  show. 

Ver.  34. — But  one  of  the  soldiers  opened  His  side . As  somewhat 
doubting,  says  S.  Cyril,  whether  He  were  really  dead ; and  if  He 
were  not,  to  hasten  His  death.  For  it  was  the  duty  of  these  soldiers 
to  carry  out  the  sentence,  and  to  see  that  criminals  were  not  taken 
away  before  it  was  certain  that  they  were  dead.  S.  Chrysostom 
adds,  “ To  please  the  Jews,  they  lay  open  His  side  and  insult  Him 
when  dead.  O most  evil  and  most  atrocious  wish.”  Some  suppose 
that  this  soldier  was  the  centurion,  who  cried  out  “ Truly  this  was 
the  Son  of  God  !”  (Matthew  xxvii.  54.)  But  it  is  not  likely  that  he 
who  so  cried  out  would  dare  to  commit  such  an  act.  Nazianzen 
in  his  “ Christus  Patiens  ” suggests  that  he  was  blind,  and  that  he 
then  regained  his  sight.  Many  stories  on  this  matter  were  collected 
by  Barradius,  which  Baronius  rejects  as  apocryphal.  Here  note 
— 1.  That  the  soldier  was  one  of  the  guard  who  brake  the  legs  of 
the  two  malefactors,  and  would  have  broken  Christ’s  also  had  he 
been  alive.  But  they  pierced  His  side,  to  show  that  He  was  dead, 
and  this  was  why  they  brake  not  His  legs.  2.  Some  say  it  was  a 
spear,  others  a sword  which  was  used.  3.  The  Vulgate  seems  to 
have  read,  #vo/gr,  but  the  Greek  is  huge.  4.  This  wound  was  so  large 
that  a hand  could  have  been  thrust  into  it  See  John  xx.  27.  5.  It 

was  on  the  right  side,  as  represented  by  painters.  Some  think  it  was 
so  foretold  by  Ezekiel  xvii.  2.  S.  Francis  also  received  his  wound 
on  the  right  side.  See  S.  Bonaventura,  Ribadeaeira,  &c.  6.  Christ 

therefore  received  six  wounds.  7.  This  wound  seems  to  have 
pierced  through  both  sides,  as  Prudentius  says  in  several  passages. 
As,  e.g., 

As  struck  the  cruel  spear  through  either  side, 

Water  and  Blood  poured  forth  in  mingled  tide  : 

For  victory  this,  and  that  to  cleanse  applied. 


De  Pass,  Christi  [apud  Diptych,  num.  xlii.];  Peristeph.  Hymn 
viii.  [15];  and  Cathomer,  Hymn  ix.  [85];  [Pseud  o]-Cyprian  also 


Digitized  by>  joogle 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIK. 


a#8 

(de  Pass.)  says  the  same.  Thfophylact  speaks  of  this  wound  in  the 
plural  number,  Prudentius  seems  to  imply  that  the  larger  wound 
emitted  blood,  and  the  smaller  wound  on  the  left  side  water.  But 
this  wound  on  the  left  side  was  so  small  as  not  to  be  taken  into 
account.  Hence  there  were  only  five  wounds.  S.  Bridget’s  Revel 
iv.  40,  vii.  15,  and  ii.  21,  are  also  referred  to. 

And  forthwith  came  thereout  blood  and  water . Both  together 
(not  separately,  as  Nonnus  paraphrases),  but  yet  not  mixed,  but  so 
that  they  could  be  distinguished  from  each  other.  But  this  could 
not  be  the  case  naturally,  because  the  blood  of  a dead  body  congeals, 
and  pure  blood  cannot  flow  from  it.  And  this  was  pure  blood,  not 
serum,  as  Innoc.  III.  lays  it  down  (Lib.  iii.  Decret.  tit  41,  de  Celebr . 
Miss,  cap . viii.)  Calvin  is  therefore  wrong  in  saying  that  water 
is  contained  in  the  pericardium.  Therefore  this  flowing  forth  of 
blood  and  water  was  miraculous,  as  S.  Ambrose  on  Luke  xxiii.,  Euthy- 
mius,  and  Theophylact  say.  The  latter  remarks,  “ The  contumely 
is  changed  into  a miracle,  and  wonderful  it  was  that  blood  flowed 
forth  from  a dead  body.  But  a caviller  might  say  that  some  vital 
force  might  probably  remain  in  the  body.  But  the  water  which 
flowed  forth  puts  the  matter  beyond  all  dispute.”  He  says  after- 
wards, “ Confounded  be  the  Armenians,  who  in  the  Mysteries  mix 
not  water  with  the  wine.  For,  as  it  seems,  they  do  not  believe 
that  water  flowed  forth  from  the  side  (which  would  be  more 
wonderful),  but  blood  only.  And  in  this  passage  they  do  away  with 
a mighty  miracle.  The  blood  then  is  the  symbol  of  a crucified 
man,  but  the  water  of  one  who  is  above  man,  that  is,  of  God.”  See 
Adam  Coutzen  and  Francis  Lucas  on  this  passage. 

But  this  took  place  by  way  of  mystery.  But  what  mystery? 
(1.)  To  show  the  reality  of  Christ’s  human  nature.  See  1 John  v.  7. 
(2.)  To  signify  that  the  Church  was  formed  as  the  Spouse  of 
Christ  out  of  the  side  of  the  second  Adam  dying  on  the  Cross. 
Symbolically,  i.e.  and  figuratively,  as  meaning  that  the  Church  was 
purchased,  founded,  and  sanctified  by  the  Blood  of  Christ.  As  S. 
Ambrose  (on  Luke  xxiii.)  says,  “Life  flowed  forth  from  that  dead 
body.  For  water  and  blood  flowed  forth,  the  one  to  cleanse,  the 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


WATER  AND  BLOOD. 


249 


other  to  redeem;”  and  as  S.  Cyril* and  Chrysostom  say,  that  the 

ft 

water  signifies  baptism,  which  is  the  first  beginning  of  the  Church 
and  the  other  sacraments,  and  the  blood  represents  the  Eucharist, 
which  is  the  end  and  completion  of  the  sacraments,  to  which  they 
all  refer  as  to  their  beginning  and  their  end.  Whence  S.  Augustine 
says  (in  loc,\  that  all  sacraments  flowed  forth  from  the  side  of 
Christ,  in  mystery,  as  I said.  His  words  are,  “ It  is  not  said  that 
he  ‘ struck  * or  ‘ wounded,'  but  that  he  ‘ opened  * the  side  of  Christ, 
that  the  door  of  life  might  thus,  as  it  were,  be  opened,  from  whence 
the  sacraments  of  the  Church  flowed  forth,  without  which  there  is  no 
entrance  to  true  life."  And  S.  Chrysostom:  “Because  the  sacred 
mysteries  take  their  rise  from  thence,  when  thou  approachest 
the  awful  Chalice,  thou  shouldest  approach  it  as  if  thou  wert  about 
to  drink  from  the  very  side  of  Christ;”  and  the  reason  is,  as 
S.  Chrysostom  and  Theophylact  say,  “The  Church  exists  and  con- 
sists by  means  of  the  sacraments.”  For  it  is  bom  by  Baptism, 
strengthened  by  Confirmation,  fed  and  perfected  by  the  Eucharist, 
healed  by  Penance,  fortified  by  Extreme  Unction,  governed  by 
Holy  Orders,  and  continued  and  extended  by  Matrimony. 

As  a symbol  of  this,  Cyprian  and  others  say  that  water  must  be 
mixed  with  the  wine  in  the  consecration  of  the  Chalice. 

Tropologically , Tertullian  says  (de  Baptismo),  that  Christ  by  this 
effusion  of  Blood  and  Water  indicated  the  two  kinds  of  Baptism,  by 
water  and  by  martyrdom. 

Atiagogically . This  opening  of  Christ's  side  shadowed  forth  that 
heaven,  which  had  been  closed  for  4000  years,  was  opened  by  His 
death.  Ruffinus  adds,  In  Expos \ Symb .,  “He  poured  forth  water 
to  cleanse  believers,  and  blood  to  condemn  unbelievers.”  See 
Suarez,  Par,  iii.  Qucest,  li.  Disput.  xli.  § 1,  where,  however,  he  thinks 
that  only  the  left  side  of  Christ  was  pierced,  and  that  the  blood 
first  ran  forth,  and  afterwards  the  water,  both  which  are  equally 
probable. 

Ver.  35. — And  he  that  saw  it  bare  record.  Probably  John  him- 
self, who  speaks  of  himself  unassumingly  in  the  third  person. 

Ver.  36. — For  these  things  were  done  that  the  scripture  should  be 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


250 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XTX. 


fulfilled  (allegorically,  not  literally),  A bone  of  Him  shall  not  be  broken. 
A bone,  i.e.  of  the  Paschal  Lamb  (Ex.  xii.  46).  The  literal  reason 
was,  that  they  had  to  eat  it  in  haste,  and  had  not  time  to  break  the 
bones  and  extract  the  marrow.  The  allegorical  reason  was,  because 
that  lamb  was  a type  of  Christ,  and  God  willed  that  a bone  of  Him 
should  not  be  broken,  in  order  that  His  sacred  Body,  which  was  to 
rise  again,  should  remain  complete  in  every  limb.  Symbolically,  it 
signified — (1.)  That  the  Godhead  of  Christ,  which  was  (as  it  were)  the 
bone  which  supported  His  Body,  remained  entire  and  uninjured  in 
His  Passion  (see  Rupertus  on  Ex.  xii.) 

(2.)  That  the  strength  and  vigour  of  Christ  as  man  (of  which  the 
bones  were  a symbol)  were  not  diminished,  but  rather  increased, 
by  His  Passion.  For  His  mind  was  steadfastly  fixed  on  God,  and 
His  will  remained  firmly  and  constantly  united  to  the  Divine  Will. 
So  the  Martyr  Hippolytus  says.  See  Theodoret,  Dialog . iii. 

Allegorically , This  signifies  that  the  Holy  Apostles,  who  were 
the  bones  of  the  Church,  were  not  to  be  broken.  (See  S.  Augustine 
on  Ps.  xxxiv. ; S.  Jerome  on  Ps.  xxi. ; and  S.  Gregory,  Mor.  xxiv.  30.) 

And  S.  Hilary,  on  Ps.  xl.,  says,  the  bones  of  Christ  were  not  broken, 
because  the  Church,  which  was  formed  of  His  bones,  ought  not  to  be 
weakened  by  their  being  broken. 

Tropologically . See  S.  Bernard  ( Scrm . de  cutey  &c.  animce).  He 
says  that  the  skin  is  good  thoughts,  the  flesh  pious  affections,  the 
bones  holy  intentions,  which,  even  when  godly  thoughts  and  affec- 
tions fail,  must  still  be  kept  unbroken  and  strong : or  else  a man 
bursts  asunder,  and  falls  to  pieces. 

Ver.  37. — And  again  another  scripture  saith , They  shall  look  on 
Him  whom  they  pierced.  See  Zech.  xii.  10. 

Ver.  38. — But  after  this  Joseph  of  Arimathcea  (being  a disciple  of 
Jesus , but  secretly  for  fear  of  the  Jews)  besought  Pilate  that  he  might 
take  away  the  body  of  Jesus : and  Pilate  gave  him  leave.  He  came 
therefore , and  took  the  body  of  Jesus.  See  notes  on  Matt,  xxvii.  58. 
He  took  away  the  Body  of  Jesus  to  be  buried  (says  S.  Chrysostom), 
“ not  as  that  of  a criminal,  but  of  a great  and  wonderful  prophet. 
For  he  did  not  believe  that  He  was  God,  and  that  He  would  rise 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


BURIAL  OF  JESUS. 


251 


again  on  the  third  day.  He  had  faith  in  Jesus,  but  yet  an  imperfect 
faith.”  But  see  here,  how  God  exalts  the  humble.  For  the  more 
ignominious  was  His  Passion  and  death,  the  more  glorious  was  His 
lepulchre.  See  Is.  xi.  10.  “ His  sepulchre  will  be  glorious.” 

(See  Vulg.) 

Ver.  39. — And  there  came  also  Nicodemus , which  at  the  first  came 
to  Jesus  by  night  He  came  first  by  night,  but  afterwards  to  hear 
Him,  and  become  His  disciple.  (See  S.  Augustine  in  loc.) 

Bearing  a mixture  of  myrrh  and  aloes , about  a hundred  pounds' 
weight  To  embalm  and  bury  nobly  so  great  a prophet.  He  wished 
not  only  to  pour  the  ointment  over  the  whole  body,  but  to  embalm, 
and  cover  it  over  with  it.  He  probably  did  not  use  the  whole  of  it, 
but  only  what  was  necessary.  Nicpdemus  obtained  an  ample  reward 
for  this  kind  office  to  Christ,  for  by  His  grace  he  became  not  only 
a Christian,  but  a Confessor. 

Lucian,  in  his  epistle  De  Invent \ Corp.  S.  Stephen  [in  the  appendix 
to  the  7th  volume  of  S.  Augustine],  thus  tells  the  story.  “The 
Jews,  learning  that  he  was  a Christian,  removed  him  from  his  office, 
excommunicated  and  banished  him.  Then  I,  Gamaliel,  brought 
him  into  my  own  place,  fed  and  clothed  him,  and  buried  him  honour- 
ably near  to  S.  Stephen”  [see  also  S.  Augustine,  Serm.  316-324]. 
In  the  martyrology  he  is  enrolled  with  S.  Stephen  among  the  saints. 

Then  took  they  the  body  of  Jesus , and  wound  it  with  linen  cloths 
(now  preserved  at  Turin),  as  the  manner  of  the  Jews  is  to  bury . See 
on  Matt.  xxvi.  59. 

This  mode  of  burial  the  early  Christians  imitated,  who  incurred 
lavish  expense  in  their  burial  and  embalming.  See  Tertullian  in 
Apolog. ; Prudentius  in  Hymno  de  Exequiis ; Nyssen,  Orat.  in  fun . 
Meletii;  Nazianzen,  Epist  xviii. 

The  Christians  adopted  this  practice  from  the  Jews,  the  Jews 
from  the  Egyptians.  See  S.  Augustine,  Serm.  cxx.  de  diversis  [nunc, 
ccclxi.  § 12]. 

Ver.  41. — Now  in  the  place  where  He  was  crucified  there  was  a garden 
(for  where  could  Jesus,  the  Author  of  all  verdure  and  vigour,  be 
buried,  except  in  a garden  ?)  See  notes  on  Matt,  xxvii.  60.  And  in 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


252 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XIX. 


the  garden  a new  sepulchre , wherein  was  never  man  yet  laid ; as  S.  Au- 
gustine says,  “ As  no  one  before  or  after  Him  was  conceived  in  a 
virgin’s  womb,  so  no  one  either  before  or  after  Him  was  buried  in 
that  tomb.” 

Ver.  42. — There  laid  they  Jesus  therefore , because  of  the  Jew?  pre- 
paration day , for  the  coming  sabbath,  in  which  it  was  not  lawful  to 
work,  or  to  bury  any  one  (so  S.  Chrysostom,  Theophylact,  Euthy- 
mius),  for  the  sepulchre  was  nigh  at  hand.  “They  wished,”  said 
Euthymius,  “to  lay  Jesus  in  another  and  more  fitting  tomb,  at  a 
greater  distance  from  the  city.”  But  God  wished  Him  to  be  buried 
near  Golgotha  and  Jerusalem.  S.  Chrysostom  gives  the  reason : 
“That  the  disciples  might  the  more  readily  betake  themselves  thither, 
and  observe  what  was  going  on  thereabouts,  and  also  that  not  only 
they,  but  their  enemies  also,  might  be  witnesses  of  His  buriaL  The 
seal  also,  and  the  guards  who  were  placed  over  the  sepulchre,  were 
witnesses  to  the  same.  Christ  wished  that  His  death  should  be 
witnessed  no  less  than  His  Resurrection,  for  if  His  death  had  been 
a matter  of  doubt,  the  proof  of  His  Resurrection  would  not  hold 
good.  And  not  only  did  He  wish,  for  these  reasons,  to  be  buried 
nigh  at  hand,  but  also  that  no  one  might  falsely  allege  that  His 
Body  had  been  stolen  away.” 


Digitized  by  V google 


( 25?  ) 


CHAPTER  XX. 

I  Christ , on  rising  from  the  tomb , appears  first  to  Mary  Magdalene ; secondly 
vei\  19,  to  ten  of  the  Apostles , and  breathing  on  them  gave  them  power  to  remit 
sins  ; lastly , z ter.  26,  He  appears  to  Thomas , and  bids  him  touch  and  handle  His 
wounds. 

THE  first  day  of  the  week  cometh  Mary  Magdalene  early,  when  it  was  yet 
dark,  unto  the  sepulchre,  and  seeth  the  stone  taken  away  from  the 
sepulchre. 

2  Then  she  runneth,  and  cometh  to  Simon  Peter,  and  to  the  other  disciple, 
whom  Jesus  loved,  and  saith  unto  them,  They  have  taken  away  the  Lord  out  of 
the  sepulchre,  and  we  know  not  where  they  have  laid  him. 

3  Peter  therefore  went  forth,  and  that  other  disciple,  and  came  to  the 
sepulchre. 

4  So  they  ran  both  together:  and  the  other  disciple  did  outrun  Peter,  and 
came  first  to  the  sepulchre. 

5  And  he  stooping  down,  and  looking  in,  saw  the  linen  clothes  lying ; yet  went 
he  not  in. 

6  Then  cometh  Simon  Peter  following  him,  and  went  into  the  sepulchre,  and 
seeth  the  linen  clothes  lie, 

7  And  the  napkin,  that  was  about  his  head,  not  lying  with  the  linen  clothes, 
but  wrapped  together  in  a place  by  itself. 

8  Then  went  in  also  that  other  disciple,  which  came  first  to  the  sepulchre,  and 
he  saw,  and  believed. 

9  For  as  yet  they  knew  not  the  scripture,  that  he  must  rise  again  from  the 
dead. 

10  Then  the  disciples  went  away  again  unto  their  own  home. 

11  IT  But  Mary  stood  without  at  the  sepulchre  weeping  : and  as  she  wept,  she 
stooped  down,  ami  looked  into  the  sepulchre, 

12  And  seeth  two  angels  in  white  sitting,  the  one  at  the  head,  and  the  other  at 
the  feet,  where  the  body  of  Jesus  had  lain. 

13  And  they  say  unto  her,  Woman,  why  weepest  thou  ? She  saith  unto  them, 
Because  they  have  taken  away  my  Lord,  and  I know  not  where  they  have  laid 
him. 

14  And  when  she  had  thus  said,  she  turned  herself  back,  and  saw  Jesus  stand- 
ing, and  knew  not  that  it  was  Jesus. 

15  Jesus  saith  unto  her,  Woman,  why  weepest  thou?  whom  seekest  thou? 
She,  supposing  him  to  be  the  gardener,  saith  unto  him,  Sir,  if  thou  have  borne 
him  hence,  tell  me  where  thou  hast  laid  him,  and  I will  take  him  away. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


254 


S.  JvjilN,  c.  XX. 


16  Jesus  saith  unto  her,  Mary.  She  turned  herself,  and  saith  unto  him, 
Rabboni ; which  is  to  say,  Master. 

1 7 Jesus  saith  unto  her,  Touch  me  not ; for  I am  not  yet  ascended  to  my 
Father : but  go  to  my  brethren,  and  say  unto  them,  I ascend  unto  my  Father, 
and  your  Father  ; and  to  my  God,  and  your  God. 

1 8 Mary  Magdalene  came  and  told  the  disciples  that  she  had  seen  the  Lord, 
and  that  he  had  spoken  these  things  unto  her. 

19  IT  Then  the  same  day  at  evening,  being  the  first  day  of  the  week,  when  the 
doors  were  shut  where  the  disciples  were  assembled  for  fear  of  the  Jews,  came 
Jesus  and  stood  in  the  midst,  and  saith  unto  them,  Peace  be  unto  you. 

20  And  when  he  had  so  said,  he  shewed  unto  them  his  hands  and  his  side. 
Then  were  the  disciples  glad,  when  they  saw  the  Lord. 

21  Then  said  Jesus  to  them  again,  Peace  be  unto  you  : as  my  Father  hath  sent 
me,  even  so  send  I you. 

22  And  when  he  had  said  this,  he  breathed  on  them , and  saith  unto  them, 
Receive  ye  the  Holy  Ghost : 

23  Whose  soever  sins  ye  remit,  they  are  remitted  unto  them  : and  whose  so- 
ever sins  ye  retain,  they  are  retained. 

24  IT  But  Thomas,  one  of  the  twelve,  called  Didymus,  was  not  with  them  when 
Jesus  came. 

25  The  other  disciples  therefore  said  unto  him,  We  have  seen  the  Lord.  But 
he  said  unto  them,  Except  I shall  see  in  his  hands  the  print  of  the  nails,  and  put 
my  finger  into  the  print  of  the  nails,  and  thrust  my  hand  into  his  side,  I will  not 
believe. 

26  IT  And  after  eight  days  again  his  disciples  were  within,  and  Thomas  with 
them  : then  came  Jesus,  the  doors  being  shut,  and  stood  in  the  midst,  and  said, 
Peace  be  unto  you. 

27  Then  saith  he  to  Thomas,  Reach  hither  thy  finger,  and  behold  my  hands  ; 
and  reach  hither  thy  hand,  and  thrust  it  into  my  side  : and  be  not  faithless,  but 
believing. 

28  And  Thomas  answered  and  said  unto  him,  My  Lord  and  my  God. 

29  Jesus  saith  unto  him,  Thomas,  because  thou  hast  seen  me,  thou  hast 
believed  ; blessed  are  they  that  have  not  seen,  and  yet  have  believed. 

30  H And  many  other  signs  truly  did  Jesus  in  the  presence  of  his  disciples, 
which  are  not  written  in  this  book  : 

31  But  these  are  written,  that  ye  might  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son 
of  God ; and  that  believing  ye  might  have  life  through  his  name. 

Ver.  1. — On  the  first  day  of  the  week.  Literally,  of  the  Sabbath,  the 
week  being  called  the  Sabbath,  after  its  principal  day,  or  the  day  of 
the  Pasch.  (see  on  Matt,  xxviii.) 

Mary  Magdalene  came.  The  other  gospels  speak  of  the  other  women, 
but  she  only  is  mentioned  here,  as  being  their  leader,  and  more 
zealous  and  active  than  the  rest. 

When  it  was  yet  dark . In  the  early  dawn  (profundo  diluculo\ 
says  S.  Luke.  Note  here  her  activity,  watchfulness,  and  ardour. 


Digitized  by  v^jooole 


THE  EMPTY  SEPULCHRE. 


255 


She  seeks  Christ  in  the  dawn,  and  hence  she  is  the  first  to  see  Him 
as  the  rising  sun.  As  S.  Ambrose  says  on  the  title  of  Ps.  lv.,*  “ For 
the  morning  undertaking.”  This  morning  undertaking  we  can 
ascribe  to  Mary  Magdalene,  who  went  very  early  in  the  morning 
to  watch  at  the  tomb,  and  first  greeted  the  resurrection  of  the  Lord, 
and  as  the  sunlight  grew  brighter,  she  only,  and  before  the  rest, 
recognised  the  rising  of  the  Sun  of  righteousness,  and  as  by  this 
morning  greeting  she  rejoiced  at  the  return  of  daylight,  so  did  she 
rejoice  the  more  that  Christ  was  raised  from  the  dead,  and  in  her 
was  fulfilled  the  prophecy,  In  the  evening  weeping  will  tarry  (see  Vulg.) 
(heaviness  may  endure  for  the  night,  E , V,)  but  at  morning  is  joy 
(Ps.  xxx.  6). 

Unto  the  sepulchre.  To  anoint  the  Body  of  Jesus,  says 
Nonnus. 

And  saw  the  stone  taken  away . And  the  Angels,  who  said  that 
Christ  had  risen,  but  the  Magdalene  did  not  believe  it,  and  ran  to 
Peter  and  John,  saying,  “ They  have  taken  away  my  Lord,  and  I 
know,  not  where  they  have  laid  Him.”  See  notes  on  S.  Matt, 
xxviii.  8.  S.  Jerome  remarks  (Ep,  cl.  ad  Hedibiam ),  Her  error  was 
connected  with  piety — piety  in  longing  to  see  Him  whose  Majesty 
she  knew,  but  her  mistake  was  in  what  she  said. 

Ver.  2. — Then  she  runneth , and  cometh  to  Simon  Peter , as  the  Chief 
Apostle,  and  as  designated  by  Christ  as  His  Vicar  and  successor, 
(Matt,  xvi.),  and  that  other  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved , Le.  S.  John, 
who  would  be  more  diligent  than  the  rest  in  searching  for  the  Body 
of  Christ. 

Ver.  4. — So  they  ran  both  together.  Before  the  rest,  as  loving  Him 
above  the  rest,  says  S.  Gregory. 

And  he  (John)  did  outrun  Peter , as  the  younger  and  more  active, 
and  moreover  as  more  desirous  of  seeing  that  Body  which  he  had 
just  before  seen  marred  on  the  cross. 

Ver.  5. — And  he  stooping  down , to  look  into  the  tomb,  saw  the 
linen  clothes  with  which  the  Body  of  Christ  had  been  wrapped.  Yet 
went  he  not  in , paying  deference  to  Peter,  as  his  senior  and  more 
# It  is  not  the  title  of  Ps.  lv.  in  fact,  but  of  Ps.  xxi. — Tram . 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


256 


S.  JOHN,  c.  XX. 


worthy,  says  Lyranus,  or  else  hindered  by  fear,  or  seized  with  a 
kind  of  sacred  dread  at  the  Body  of  Christ  which  was  buried 
there. 

Ver.  6. — Then  cometh  Simon  Peter  following  him , and  went  into 
the  sepulchre,  Peter  (says  S.  Chrysostom)  entered  with  ardour,  and 
carefully  inspected  everything.  For  the  soldiers  who  guarded  the 
tomb,  when  they  saw  the  angel  and  the  earthquake,  ran  away 
through  fear.  See  also  S.  Jerome,  Quasi,  vi.  ad  Hedib.  And 
seeth  the  linen  clothes  lie , and  the  napkin  which  was  about  His  head 
(covering  His  face,  as  is  generally  done  to  the  dead,  for  the  sake  of 
seemliness),  not  lying  with  the  linen  clothes , but  wrapped  together  in  a 
place  by  itself  “This,”  says  S.  Chrysostom,  “was  a sign  of  His 
Resurrection,  for  if  they  had  removed  the  body  they  would  not  have 
stripped  it,  and  if  they  had  stolen  it,  they  would  not  have  been  so 
careful  to  fold  up  the  napkin,  and  put  it  aside  by  itself;  for  John 
had  said  before  that  He  was  buried  with  myrrh,  which  makes  linen 
clothes  cling  close  to  the  body,  so  that  no  one  would  be  deceived 
by  those  who  said  that  It  was  stolen  away;  for  what  thief  would 
trouble  himself  so  much  about  an  unnecessary  matter  ? ” 

Ver.  8. — Then  went  in  also  that  other  disciple, t which  camejirstto 
the  sepulchre. 

Tropologically , Toletus  says  that  by  John  are  signified  all  Chris- 
tians, but  by  Peter  the  Pontiffs,  Vicars  of  Christ.  Peter  then  entered 
the  tomb  first  as  the  highest  in  dignity,  as  the  Vicar  of  Christ ; but 
John  came  last,  because  it  is  possible  that  he  who  is  first  in  rank, 
is  behind  others  in  desert  and  holiness. 

And  he  saw  and  believed.  Both  of  them,  that  is,  believed  that  what 
Mary  Magdalene  said  was  true,  namely,  that  the  Body  of  Christ  had 
been  taken  away.  So  says  S.  Augustine,  Theophylact,  and  Jansen. 
S.  Cyril,  Chrysostom,  Euthymius,  and  Nyssen  add  that  both  believed 
that  Christ  had  risen.  But  this  word  “ believed  ” more  clearly  and 
correctly  applies  only  to  S.  John,  who  remembered  the  words  of 
Christ,  that  He  would  rise  on  the  third  day.  But  Peter,  on  account 
01  the  strangeness  of  a Resurrection,  and  from  His  earnest  desire  to 
see  Him  alive  again,  was  more  slow  to  believe  that  Christ  had  risen. 


~ - - 


THfe  MAGDALENE  AT  THE  TOMB.  257 

Whence  the  Angel  significantly  said  to  the  women,  “ Go,  tell  His 
disciples  and  Peter.”  (Mark  xvi.  7.) 

Ver.  9. — For  as  yet  they  knew  not  the  scriptures , that  He  must  rise 
again  from  the  dead.  For  although  He  had  solemnly  assured  them 
that  He  would  rise,  yet  on  account  of  its  strange  and  wonderful 
nature  they  believed  it  not,  but  thought  that  He  spoke  in  a figure 
and  parable,  as  He  was  wont  to  do. 

Ver.  10. — Then  the  disciples  went  away  again  unto  their  own  home. 
Peter  wondering,  John  believing  He  had  risen,  the  Magdalene  alone 
remaining  at  the  sepulchre,  to  learn  something  more  certain  about 
the  Body  of  her  beloved  Christ.  See  S.  Augustine  (in  loc.)  “ And 
hence  it  came  to  pass  that  she  alone  saw  Him,  she  who  remained 
to  seek  for  Him,  for  perseverance  in  a good  work  is  a virtue,”  says 
S.  Gregory,  Horn.  xxv. 

Ver.  1 1. — But  Mary  stood  without  at  the  sepulchre  weeping.  Because 
she  anxiously  looked  about  on  every  side  for  the  Body  of  Jesus,  as 
glowing  in  love  for  Him,  and  was  beside  herself ; and  not  finding 
Him,  wept  for  grief.  “The  eyes  (says  S.  Augustine  in  loc.)  who 
sought,  but  found  Him  not,  had  leisure  to  weep,  and  sorrowed  more 
for  His  being  taken  from  the  tomb  than  that  He  had  died  on  the 
Cross,  because  not  even  a memorial  remained  of  so  great  a Teacher, 
whose  life  had  been  taken  away.” 

And  as  she  wept,  she  stooped  down , and  looked  into  the  sepulchre. 
Though  she  looked  in  before  and  saw  that  the  sepulchre  was  empty. 
For,  as  says  S.  Gregory  (in  loc.),  “ A single  look  suffices  not  one  who 
loves.  The  power  of  love  increases  the  earnestness  of  the  inquiry : 
she  persevered  in  seeking,  and  accordingly  she  found.  And  so  it 
was  that  her  desires  expanded  and  increased,  and  could  thus  take 
in  that  which  they  found.” 

Ver.  1 2. — And  saw  two  angels  in  white  sitting , the  one  at  the  head,  and 
the  other  at  the  feet,  where  the  body  of fesus  had  lain.  All  these  were 
tokens  of  His  glorious  Resurrection,  and  prepared  the  mind  of  the 
Magdalene  to  believe  it.  One  sat  at  the  head  and  the  other  at  the 
feet,  to  signify  that  the  whole  Body  of  Christ  had  risen,  and  that,  by 

assuming  the  immortal  form  and  glory  of  angels,  He  had  entered 

VOL.  v R 


digitized 


Google 


258  S.  JOHN,  C.  XX. 

into  their  company,  and  had  left  these  two  angels,  as  guardians  of 
the  tomb,  to  announce  the  fact  to  the  Magdalene. 

Origen  says  that,  mystically,  the  angel  at  the  feet  represented  the 
active,  the  angel  at  the  head  the  contemplative,  life.  For  they  are 
both  of  them  from  Jesus,  about  Jesus,  through  Jesus,  and  on  account 
of  Jesus. 

Ver.  13. — They  say  unto  her,  Woman,  why  weepest  thou  ? This  is  no 
place  for  weeping,  but  rather  for  rejoicing,  and  being  glad.  Because 
thou  seest  not  here  the  dead  Body  of  thy  Beloved  One,  thou 
oughtest  to  infer  that  Jesus  has  risen,  and  is  no  longer  among 
the  dead,  but  among  the  living ; and  more  than  this,  that  He  is 
passing  a blessed  and  heavenly  life  among  the  glorious  angels,  such 
as  we  are  ourselves. 

She  saith  unto  them,  Because  they  have  taken  away  my  Lord ',  and  I 
know  not  where  they  have  laid  him.  I weep  for  three  reasons.  (1.) 
Because  of  the  ignominious  death  of  my  Lord.  (2.)  Because  His 
Body  has  been  taken  away,  for  if  I saw  It,  I should  kiss  It,  lament 
over  It,  and  anoint  It.  (3.)  Because  I do  not  know  where  to  look 
for  It.  For  did  I know,  I should  haste  to  the  spot,  embrace  It, 
and  overwhelm  It  with  kisses.  See  here  how  Jesus  suffers  the  souls 
of  those  that  love  Him  to  remain  in  ignorance  for  a while,  in  order 
to  sharpen  and  enkindle  their  desire  for  Him ; and  when  it  is  thus 
sharpened  and  enkindled,  to  comfort  and  make  them  glad  with  the 
full  revelation  of  Himself. 

Ver.  14. — And  when  she  had  thus  said,  she  turned  herself  back,  and 
saw  Jesus  standing,  and  knew  not  that  it  was  Jesus . Christ  appeared 
behind  the  Magdalene,  so  that  the  angels  who  beheld  Him  rose  up, 
and  bowed  their  heads,  and  exhibited  other  tokens  of  reverence  and 
adoration  towards  Him.  And  this  was  why  she  turned  about,  viz., 
to  see  who  it  was  whom  the  angels  saluted  so  reverently.  So  S. 
Chrysostom  {Horn.  85),  and  the  author  of  the  Quasi . ad  Antioch 
(Quasi,  lxxviii.),  [Pseudo-Athanasian].  Some  think  that  Christ  made 
a noise  with  His  feet  to  attract  her  attention. 

And  saw  Jesus.  “The  first  to  share  the  joy:  as  loving  more 
than  all” 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


CHRIST’S  GLORIFIED  BODY. 


259 


And  knew  not  that  it  was  Jesus . As  appearing  in  the  form  of 
the  gardener.  Just  as  He  appeared  in  the  form  of  a stranger  at 
Emmaus.  For  glorified  bodies  can  put  on  any  appearance  they 
please,  not  by  changing  their  own  appearance,  but  by  presenting 
only  a refracted  appearance  to  the  sight  of  others.  Christ  did  this, 
in  order  that  she  should  not  be  startled.  He  appeared  to  her  in 
consequence  of  h$r  intense  love  to  Him.  But  because  she  did  not 
believe  that  He  was  alive,  He  veiled  Himself  from  her,  and  pre- 
sented Himself  to  her  outward  sight  as  the  person  she  fancied  Him 
to  be.  So  S.  Gregory  ( Horn . xxiil),  speaking  of  the  disciples  at 
Emmaus. 

Ver.  15 .—Jesus  saith  unto  her , Woman>  why  weepest  thou  ? whom 
seekest  thou ? S.  Ambrose  {Lib.  iii.  de  Virg.)  explains  the  whole 
passage  minutely : “ Woman,  why  weepest  thou  ? He  who  believeth 
not  is  a woman ; for  he  that  believes  rises  up  into  the  * perfect  man, 
into  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ.’  It  is  a 
reproach  not  on  her  sex,  but  on  her  slowness  of  belief.  It  is  well 
said  a woman  hesitated,  though  a virgin  had  already  believed. 
Why  weepest  thou  ? Thou  thyself  art  in  fault,  as  being  incredulous. 
Dost  thou  weep  because  thou  seest  not  Christ  ? Believe,  and  thou 
wilt  see  Him.  Christ  is  close  by  thee,  He  never  fails  those  that 
seek  Him.  Thou  shouldest  not  weep,  but  have  ready  faith,  as  God 
requires.  Think  not  of  mortal  things,  and  thou  wilt  not  sorrow; 
think  not  of  perishing  things,  and  thou  wilt  have  no  cause  for 
weeping.  Thou  weepest  for  that,  at  which  others  are  glad.  Whom 
seekest  thou  ? seest  thou  not  that  Christ  is  at  thy  side  ? ” 

Origen  wrote  a striking  Homily,  and  one  full  of  devout  feelings, 
respecting  the  Magdalene,*  in  which  he  says,  among  other  things, 
“Love  made  her  stand  there,  and  sorrow  caused  her  to  weep. 
She  stood  and  looked  around,  if  perchance  she  could  see  Him 
whom  she  loved.  She  wept,  as  thinking  that  He  whom  she  was 
looking  for,  had  been  taken  away.  Her  grief  was  renewed,  because 
at  first  she  sorrowed  for  Him  as  dead,  and  now  she  was  sorrowing 
for  Him  as  having  been  taken  away.  And  this  last  sorrow  was  the 

* This  is  a supposititious  work,  and  is  found  only  in  Latin, 


Digitized  by  v^jooole 


26o 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XX. 


greater  because  she  had  no  consolation.”  And  then  he  proceeds  to 
lay  open  the  sources  of  her  sorrow,  saying,  “Peter  and  John  were 
afraid,  and  therefore  did  not  remain.  But  Mary  feared  not,  because 
she  felt  that  there  was  nothing  left  for  her  to  fear.  She  had  lost  her 
Master,  whom  she  loved  with  such  singular  affection,  that  $he  could 
not  love  or  set  her  hopes  on  anything  but  Him.  She  had  lost  the 
life  of  her  soul,  and  now  she  thought  it  would  be  better  for  her  to 
die  than  to  live,  for  she  might  perchance  thus  find  Him  when  dead, 
whom  she  could  not  find  while  she  lived.  ‘Love  is  strong  as 
death.’  What  else  could  death  do  in  her  case  ? She  was  lifeless, 
she  was  insensible : feeling  she  felt  not,  seeing  she  saw  not,  hearing 
she  heard  not  And  she  was  not  really  there,  even  where  she 
seemed  to  be.  Her  whole  thoughts  were  with  her  Master,  and  yet 
she  knew  not  where  He  was.  I seek  not  for  the  angels,  who  do  but 
increase,  and  not  remove  my  grief,  but  I seek  my  own  Lord,  and  the 
Lord  of  angels.”  And  after  a few  more  bursts  of  glowing  and  holy 
affections,  he  adds,  “I  am  straitened  on  every  side,  I know  not 
what  to  choose.  If  I remain  by  the  tomb,  I find  Him  not ; if  I 
retire  from  it,  I know  not  where  to  go,  or  where  to  seek  for  Him  r 
hapless  that  I am.  To  leave  the  tomb  is  death  to  me,  to  remain  by 
it  is  irremediable  sorrow.  But  it  is  better  for  me  to  keep  watch 
over  His  tomb,  than  to  go  far  away  from  it.  For  perhaps  when  I 
return,  I shall  find  that  He  has  been  taken  away,  and  His  sepulchre 
destroyed.  I will  therefore  remain  here  and  die,  that  at  least  I may 
be  buried  by  the  sepulchre  of  my  Lord.  Return,  my  beloved  one, — 
return,  the  loved  one  of  my  vows.”  He  then  adds,  “ Why,  Beloved 
Master,  dost  Thou  trouble  the  spirit  of  this  woman?  Why  dost 
Thou  distress  her  mind  ? She  depends  entirely  on  Thee,  she  abides 
entirely  on  Thee,  she  hopes  solely  on  Thee,  and  utterly  despairs  of 
herself.  She  seeks  Thee,  as  seeking  or  thinking  of  no  one  besides. 
And  perhaps  she  does  not  recognise  Thee  because  she  is  not  in  her 
right  mind,  but  quite  beside  herself  for  Thy  sake.  Why  then  dost 
Thou  say,  ‘Why  weepest  thou — whom  seekest  thou?”’ 

She,  supposing  Him  to  be  the  gardener , saith  unto  Him . Because,  as 
Theophylact  and  Euthymius  say,  “ He  was  meanly  dressed,  and 


— ' - 


)gie 


THE  GARDENER. 


26l 


because  He  seemed  from  His  dress  to  be  at  home  there.  She  knew 
that  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  did  not  live  there,  and  supposed  that  He 
was  the  person  left  in  charge  of  the  garden.  So  F.  Lucas.  [Pseudo]- 
Origen  proceeds,  **  O Mary,  if  thou  art  seeking  for  Jesus,  why  dost 
thou  not  recognise  Him  ? And  if  thou  dost  recognise  Him,  why 
art  thou  seeking  for  Him  ? Behold  Jesus  cometh  to  thee,  and  He 
whom  thou  seekest  asketh  of  thee,  ‘Woman,  why  weepest  thou?1 
And  thou  supposest  Him  to  be  the  gardener,  as  not  knowing  Him. 
For  indeed  Jesus  is  also  the  Gardener,  as  sowing  the  good  seed  in 
the  garden  of  thy  heart,  and  in  the  hearts  of  His  faithful  servants.” 
Whence  S.  Gregory  ( in  loc. ),  " Is  He  not  the  Gardener  who  planted 
in  her  breast,  through  His  love,  the  flourishing  seeds  of  virtues  ? ” 
Sir,  if  thou  hast  borne  Him  hence,  tell  me  where  thou  hast  laid  Him, 
and  I will  take  Him  away . She  does  not  say  “ Whom,”  but  means 
Jesus,  of  Whom  her  heart  was  full.  S.  Thomas  and  others  say,  that 
this  is  the  feeling  of  those  who  are  deeply  in  love.  They  suppose 
that  others  are  thinking  about  the  same  person  as  themselves.  Al- 
though she  might  have  thought  that  He  knew  the  answer  she  had 
already  given  to  the  angels,  They  have  taken  away  my  Lord,  &c, 
as  S.  Chrysostom  seems  to  indicate.  [Pseudo]-Origen  remarks, 
“ Such  great  grief  for  Thy  death  had  overwhelmed  her,  that  she 
could  not  think  of  Thy  resurrection.  Joseph  placed  Thy  body  in  the 
tomb,  and  Mary  also  buried  her  spirit  there,  and  so  indissolubly 
united  it  as  it  were  to  Thy  body,  that  she  could  more  easily  separate 
her  soul  from  the  body  which  it  animated,  than  she  could  separate 
her  soul  from  Thy  dead  body,  for  which  she  was  seeking.  For  the 
spirit  of  Mary  was  more  in  Thy  body  than  in  her  own ; and  in  seek- 
ing for  Thy  body  she  was  at  the  same  time  seeking  for  her  own  spirit, 
and  where  she  lost  Thy  body  she  lost  also  her  own  spirit.  What 
wonder  then  she  had  no  sense,  since  she  had  lost  her  spirit  ? What 
wonder  if  she  knew  Thee  not,  as  not  having  the  spirit  wherewith  to 
know  Thee  ? Give  her  back  then  her  spirit,  I mean  Thy  body,  and 
and  she  will  then  regain  her  senses  and  abandon  her  error.” 

And  I will  take  Him  away . — “ What  if  He  is  in  the  High  Priest’s 
palace  ? What  if  He  is  in  Pilate’s  house  ? Yes,  I will  take  Him 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


262 


S.  JOHN,  c.  XX. 


away.  Love  conquers  everything.  It  counts  impossibilities  as 
possible,  nay,  as  easy.”  So  [Pseudo]-Origen  and  S.  Chrysostom. 
Though  S.  Jerome  ( Quast  v.  ad  Hedib.)  regards  them  as  the  words 
of  ignorance  and  want  of  consideration. 

Ver.  1 6.— Jesus  saith  unto  her , Mary . She  turned  herself  \ and  saith 
unto  Him,  Rabboni,  which  is  to  say,  Master \ He  called  her  not 
merely  by  her  own  name,  but  with  that  tone  of  voice,  that  sweetness, 
grace,  and  efficacy,  with  which  He  used  to  speak  to  her ; and  she 
at  once  recognised  Him.  Whence  [Pseudoj-Origen,  wondering  at 
the  condescension  of  Christ,  exclaims,  “ O the  change  of  this  right 
hand  of  the  most  High  (Ps.  lxxvii.  io).  My  great  grief  is  turned 
into  great  joy ; the  tears  of  sorrow  are  changed  into  the  tears  of  love. 
When  she  heard  the  word  * Mary  * (for  thus  He  used  to  address  her), 
she  perceived  a wondrous  sweetness  in  the  name,  and  knew  that 
He  who  called  her  was  her  Master.  Her  spirit  then  revived  and 
her  senses  returned,  and  when  He  wished  to  add  something  more, 
she  could  not  wait,  but  from  excess  of  joy  she  interrupted  Him, 
saying,  Rabboni.  For  she  thought  that  having  found  the  1 Word  * 
she  did  not  require  a single  word  more,  and  she  deemed  it  more 
profitable  to  touch  the  * Word  ’ than  to  hear  any  words  whatever. 
O vehement  and  impatient  love  ! It  was  not  enough  for  her  to  see 
Jesus  and  to  talk  with  Him ; unless  she  also  touched  Him,  for  she 
knew  that  virtue  went  out  from  Him,  and  healed  all” 

She  turned  herself.  For  when  He  was  slow  in  answering,  she  had 
looked  away  from  Him  towards  the  angels,  as  if  to  ask  them  who 
was  this  gardener  who  was  talking  with  her,  and  why  they  stood  up 
and  greeted  Him  with  such  reverence  ? But  when  she  heard  Jesus 
addressing  her  by  name,  and  recognised  His  voice,  she  was  enrap- 
tured with  joy,  and  at  once  looked  straight  towards  Him.  The 
voice  of  the  Shepherd  reaching  the  ears  of  the  lamb,  at  once  opened 
her  eyes,  and  soothed  all  her  senses  with  its  secret  power  and  wonted 
sweetness  ; and  so  carried  her  away  out  of  herself,  that  she  at  once 
was  carried  away  with  unhoped-for  and  inexplicable  joy,  and  cried 
out  “Rabboni?  my  Master.  I,  as  Thy  disciple,  Thy  spiritual  daughter, 
give  myself  wholly  to  Thee.  In  Thee  who  hast  risen,  I myself  live 


Digitized  by 


Google 


TOUCH  ME  NOT. 


263 


again,  I exult  and  rejoice.  So  S.  Cyril,  Chrysostom,  and  others.  And 
accordingly  she  fell  down  at  His  knees,  and  wished,  as  she  was  wont, 
reverently  to  touch  His  head  and  His  feet,  and  cover  them  with 
kisses.  Just  as  the  Shunammite  embraces  the  feet  of  Eliseus  the 
prophet  (2  Kings  iv.  27).  This  is  plain  from  Christ’s  instant 
prohibition. 

Rabboni.  This  was  a word  of  greater  reverence  than  Rabbi,  and 
was  used  by  the  Magdalene  only  after  His  Resurrection.  [But  see 
Mark  x.  51.] 

Ver.  17.— -Jesus  saith  unto  her , Touch  Me  not ; for  I am  not  yd 
ascended  to  My  Father , &c.  This  is  a difficult  passage,  and  the  con- 
nection between  the  two  parts  is  even  more  difficult.  (1.)  S.  Augus- 
tine explains  the  connection  thus,  “ Touch  Me  not,  for  as  yet  thou 
art  not  worthy  to  touch  Me ; for  in  thy  thoughts  regarding  Me,  I 
have  not  as  yet  ascended  to  My  Father,  for  as  yet  thou  dost  not 
perfectly  believe  that  I am  the  Son  of  God,  and  that  I ascend  to  My 
Father.”  And  S.  Jerome  (Qucest.  v.  ad  Hedibiam)  explains  it  much 
in  the  same  way.  But  this  is  a mystical  rather  than  a literal  expla- 
nation. As  also  is  that  of  S.  Leontius  (Serm.  il  de  Ascens .),  “I  do 
not  wish  you  to  approach  Me  bodily,  or  recognise  Me  with  thy 
bodily  senses.  I reserve  thee  for  higher  things.  I am  preparing 
for  thee  greater  things.  When  I shall  have  ascended  to  My  Father, 
then  wilt  thou  touch  Me  more  perfectly  and  truly,  for  thou  wilt 
comprehend  that  which  thou  touchest  not,  and  believe  that  which 
thou  seest  not.”  (2.)  S.  Cyril  (Lib.  xii.  cap.  i.)  says,  “ He  forbade 
her  to  touch  Him,  to  signify  that  no  one  ought  to  approach  His 
glorified  Body,  which  was  soon  to  be  touched  and  received  in  the 
Eucharist,  before  receiving  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  He  had  not  yet 
sent”  But,  on  this  ground  neither  would  the  other  women,  or 
Thomas,  or  the  rest  have  been  able  to  touch  Him — which  yet  they 
did.  (3.)  S.  Chrysostom  (in  loc.)9  Theophylact,  and  Euthymius  say 
that  He  forbade  her  to  touch  Him,  because  He  wished  to  be 
touched  with  greater  reverence  than  heretofore:  since  He  would 
not  henceforth  hold  converse  with  men,  but  with  angels  and  blessed 
spirits.  But  it  does  not  appear  that  the  Magdalene  failed  in  rever- 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


264 


S.  JOHN,  c.  XX. 


ence.  And  after  all,  what  connection  has  this  with  the  reason  given, 
“I  have  not  yet  ascended  to  My  Father”?  (4.)  [Pseudo]-Justin 
{Quasi,  a Gentibus,  propos.  xlvii.),  and  after  him  Toletus  and  others, 
explain  it  thus : Touch  Me  not : for  I am  shortly  about  to  ascend 
to  heaven,  and  I wish  to  withdraw  you  gradually  from  My  accus- 
tomed presence.  Therefore,  says  [Pseudo]- Justin,  “He  did  not 
constantly  show  Himself  to  His  disciples  after  His  Resurrection, 
nor  yet  withdraw  Himself  entirely  from  their  sight,  so  that  He  was 
seen,  and  yet  not  seen.”  But  this  explanation  is  not  clear,  and 
requires  many  things  to  be  supplied,  besides  misinterpreting  the 
reason  given.  (5.)  The  best  explanation  is  this,  “Do  not  waste 
any  more  time  in  thus  touching  Me.  Go  and  bear  the  glad  tidings 
of  My  Resurrection  to  My  disciples  at  once.  I do  not  just  yet 
ascend  into  heaven.  You  will  have  ample  time  before  then  to 
touch  and  converse  with  Me.”  (See  Suarez,  par.  iii.  Disput  xlix. 
§ 3,  Ribera  {in  loc.),  and  others.)  Christ  afterwards  allowed  Him- 
self to  be  touched  by  her  and  the  other  women,  because  they  were 
then  on  their  way  to  tell  the  Apostles  that  He  had  risen.  (Matt 
xxviii  9.) 

1.  It  is  said  that  Christ  when  speaking  these  words  touched  the 
forehead  of  the  Magdalene,  and  that  Sylvester  Prieras  saw  those 
marks  when  her  tomb  was  opened  in  1497  (see  Surius,  in  Vita  S. 
M.  Magdalena).  2.  S.  Epiphanius  {Her.  xxvl)  gives  a moral 
reason,  viz.,  that  Christ  did  not  wish  to  be  touched  by  any  woman, 
except  in  the  presence  of  others ; an  example  followed  by  SS.  Augus- 
tine and  Ambrose,  S.  Martin,  S.  Chrysostom,  S.  Charles  Borromeo, 
and  others.  3.  Rupertus  gives  an  allegorical  reason.  Mary,  he  says, 
here  represented  the  Gentile  Church  which  was  to  come  to  Christ, 
not  by  corporal  but  by  spiritual  contact,  after  His  Ascension.  See 
also  Chrysostom,  Serm.  lxxv. 

It  is  most  probable,  as  S.  Augustine  {de  Consen . Evang.  iii.  24), 
Theophylact,  and  Euthymius  {in  cap . ult.  Matt.),  and  S.  Jerome 
{Episi.  ad  Hedibiam,  Quasi,  v.)  say,  that  Mary  hastened  away,  and 
came  up  with  the  other  women  who  went  away  with  Peter  and 
John,  and  that  she  then  saw  Christ  again  when  He  appeared  to 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


GO  TO  MY  BRETHREN.  2 6$ 

them  all;  that  she  then  touched  His  feet,  and  adored  Him  (see 
Matt,  xxviii.  9).  But  Toletus  says  it  was  not  so. 

TropologUally . Hence  learn  that  it  is  more  acceptable  to  Christ 
to  comfort  those  who  are  in  any  affliction,  than  to  look  only  to 
one’s  self.  So  that  when  necessity,  or  piety  or  charity  require  it,  it 
is  allowable  to  postpone  the  Sermon,  or  even  Mass,  on  a Feast  day, 
for  the  purpose  of  aiding  the  sick  and  suffering.  See  notes  on 
Matt  ix.  13. 

Symbolically . S.  Bernard  (Serm.  v.  in  Fest.  Omn.  Sand.)  says, 

“This  is  a word  of  glory,  ‘A  wise  son  is  the  glory  of  his  father.’ 
Touch  Me  not  then,  says  the  Glory.  Seek  not  glory  as  yet,  rather 
avoid  it  And  touch  Me  not  till  we  come  to  the  Father,  where  all 
our  glorying  is  secure.” 

But  go  to  My  brethren.  He  calls  them  “ Brethren  ” out  of  His 
wondrous  condescension,  being,  as  He  is,  not  only  as  God  but  also 
as  man,  the  Head  and  Lord  of  all.  For  all  men  are  brethren  as 
descended  from  Adam,  and  as  the  sons  of  God  by  grace.  But  the 
term  properly  applies  to  them  as  Apostles.  And  Christ  was  an 
Apostle,  as  being  sent  by  God,  and  He  associated  with  Him  in  His 
office  Peter  and  the  rest.  The  Pontiff  calls  in  like  manner  the 
Cardinals  and  Bishops  his  brethren,  though  he  is  their  superior. 
Christ  speaks  of  them  in  this  way  to  inspire  them  with  courage,  as 
though  He  said,  Though  they  have  forsaken  Me,  yet  I do  not 
forsake  them ; and  by  taking  on  Me  the  nature  of  man  on  rising 
again,  I will  show  Myself  to  be  their  Brother. 

And  say  unto  them, } I ascend  unto  My  Father  and  your  Father \ and 
to  My  God  and  your  God.  Remind  them  of  what  I said  to  them 
before  My  Passion,  that  after  a few  days  I should  ascend  to  God 
the  Father. 

He  says,  “ My  Father  and  your  Father,”  Mine  by  nature,  yours  by 
grace,  as  S.  Augustine  says,  to  show  that  they  had  in  common  God 
as  their  Father.  He  as  His  Father  by  nature,  they  by  adoption. 
So  S.  Ambrose  (de  Virginitate).  Moreover,  S.  Hilary  (de  Trinity 
Book  xi.),  “ He  is  His  Father,  as  of  all  others,  in  respect  of  His 
human  nature ; and  God,  as  He  is  the  God  of  all  men,  in  that  nature 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


266 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XX. 


in  which  He  is  a servant  for  God  the  Only  Begotten  is  without 
brethren.”  But  it  is  simpler  to  say  that  He  called  Him  “My 
Father,”  to  designate  His  own  Divine  Nature,  and  “ My  God  ” to  set 
forth  the  human  nature  He  had  assumed,  and  that  thus  He  was 
Very  God,  and  very  man.  So  S.  Ambrose  (ut  supra),  referring  to 
Heb.  ii.  n. 

It  means  then,  Tell  the  Apostles  to  banish  their  fear  and  sorrow, 
for  I have  risen  from  the  dead,  and  love  them  as  brethren,  and 
therefore  shall  soon  ascend  to  heaven,  to  prepare  a place  for  them, 
that  they  may  follow  Me  thither,  and  that  I may  send  them  the 
Holy  Spirit  from  thence,  to  make  them  resolute  preachers  of  My 
Gospel. 

Ver.  1 8. — Mary  came  and  told  the  disciples , I have  seen  the  Lord, 
and  He  has  said  these  things  to  me.  She  thus  became  an  apostle 
and  evangelist  to  the  Apostles.  And  accordingly,  when  she  was 
driven  into  exile  by  the  Jews,  and  arrived  at  Marseilles,  she  preached 
the  gospel  to  the  people  there.  And  she  fully  deserved  this  honour, 
by  her  glowing  love  to  Christ,  her  faith  and  constancy,  which  led  her 
to  the  sepulchre  by  herself  at  early  dawn,  where  she  waited  patiently 
till  she  saw  her  Jesus. 

Ver.  19. — Then  the  same  day  at  evening , on  the  first  day  of  the 
week.  Or  the  feast  of  the  Pasch.  (See  notes  on  Matt,  xxviii.  1.) 

When  the  doors  were  shut.  Calvin  says  that  Christ  opened  the  doors, 
or  entered  through  an  open  window,  so  as  not  to  be  compelled  to 
admit  that  one  dimension  could  penetrate  another —peneiratio  dimen - 
sionum , or  that  two  bodies  could  exist  together  in  the  same  place,  which 
Durandus  (in  iv.  dist.  44,  Quasi,  vl)  says  is  even  beyond  the  power 
of  God.  But  S.  John  here  intimates  the  contrary,  for  he  says  that  the 
doors  were  shut,  to  signify  that  Christ  passed  through  the  closed  doors, 
as  He  did  both  at  His  conception  and  nativity,  and  passed  through  the 
stone  when  He  rose  from  the  grave,  thus  manifesting  the  almighty 
power  of  His  Godhead,  and  the  gifts  conferred  upon  His  glorified 
Body.  On  this  subject  see  Bellarmine,  de  Eucharistia , iii.  6,  who 
quotes  both  Greek  and  Latin  fathers  on  this  point.  As  S.  Augustine, 
“ The  closed  doors  opposed  not  His  Body.  Let  us  grant  that  God 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


PASSING  THROUGH  THE  CLOSED  DOORS.  267 


can  do  anything,  which  we  admit,  though  we  cannot  understand.  It 
all  turns  on  the  power  of  the  Creator.”  (S.  Ambrose  on  Luke  xxiv ; 
S.  Hilary,  de  Trtn.  lib . iii. ; S.  Justin  Martyr,  Resp.  ad  Grcecor  Quces- 
tiones ; Epiphanius,  Hceresi \ lxiv.)  “As  our  Lord  rose  from  the 
grave,  not  by  raising  up  another  Body,  but  the  very  same,  changing 
it  into  the  subtile  nature  of  a spirit,  thus  He  entered  the  closed 
doors,  a thing  impossible  to  our  gross  bodies,”  &c.  (Origen).  And 
S.  Cyril,  “ The  Lord  entered  suddenly,  the  doors  being  closed,  over- 
coming the  ordinary  nature  of  things  by  His  omnipotence ; for  being 
true  God,  He  is  not  under  the  power  of  nature.”  And  Euthymius, 
quoting  S.  Chrysostom,  “ He  did  not  knock  at  the  doors,  lest  they 
should  be  alarmed,  but  as  God  entered  through  them,  though 
closed.” 

Tropologically . Christ  appears  to  those  who  have  closed  the  doors 
of  their  mind  to  the  world  and  the  flesh,  and  gives  them  unexpectedly 
the  sweetest  peace.  As  S.  Gregory  (Lib.  iv.  in  Lib.  L Reg.  cap.  v.) 
says,  “ They  have  their  doors  closed,  who  keep  their  bodies  strictly 
guarded  against  human  frailty  and  carelessness.  They  too  are 
within,  because  they  rest  in  the  inward  love  of  the  life  above.  And 
the  Lord  appears  to  them  on  His  Resurrection,  because  they 
behold  His  glory  the  more  clearly,  the  more  strictly  they  despise 
the  world  and  imitate  the  mystery  of  His  Passion.  And  they  too 
can  be  filled  with  His  Spirit  within,  because  they  enjoy  His  gifts 
and  graces  in  abundance  who  have  trained  themselves  for  their 
enjoyment  by  despising  the  things  of  sight.” 

And  stood.  Without  any  previous  sign  of  His  coming,  with  the 
swiftness  of  thought. 

Tropologically.  S.  Bernard  says  (Serm.  vi.  de  Ascens.\  “ Thou  art 
deceived,  O Thomas,  in  hoping  to  see  the  Lord  when  separated 
from  the  company  of  the  Apostles.  The  truth  loves  not  holes  and 
corners,  takes  no  pleasure  in  places  apart.  He  stands  in  the  midst, 
that  is,  He  takes  pleasure  in  common  discipline,  common  life, 
common  studies.” 

And  saith  unto  them , Peace  be  unto  you.  This  is  the  usual  Hebrew 
mode  of  greeting,  for  peace  brings  with  it  every  good,  war  every  evil 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


268 


S.  JOHN,  c.  XX. 


Ver.  20. — And  when  He  had  so  said , He  s)iowed  them  His  hands 
and  His  side . It  is  clear  from  this  verse  (and  still  more  clearly  from 
ver.  27)  that  Christ  after  His  Resurrection  retained  not  only  the 
scars,  but  even  the  very  holes,  of  His  wounds,  and  that  really  and 
not  in  appearance.  So  S.  Augustine  teaches  in  answer  to  Porphyrius 
(Epist.  xlix.  [a/,  cii.]  ad  Deogratias).  He  did  not  fill  them  up  with 
His  glorified  flesh,  but  left  them  open,  in  order  that  they  might  be 
incontrovertible  proofs  of  the  truth  of  His  Body,  and  of  Its  Resur- 
rection. So  S.  Cyril  and  Leontius.  S.  Augustine  says  (in  loc.)9 
“ The  nails  had  wounded  His  hands,  the  spear  had  pierced  His  side, 
and  the  marks  of  the  wounds  were  left,  to  heal  the  hearts  of  the 
doubtful”  2.  This  was  a sign  of  His  victory  over  sin,  he  world, 
the  flesh,  and  the  devil.  So  S.  Augustine  and  S.  Ambrose  in  Luke 
(cap.  ult.)  3.  To  inspire  us  with  greater  confidence,  inasmuch  as 
Christ,  by  displaying  these  wounds  to  the  Father,  intercedes  for  us. 
See  S.  Anselm  on  Heb.  ix.  and  [Pseudo]-Cyprian,  de  Baptismo 
Christi . 4.  To  enkindle  our  love,  and  to  lead  us  in  return  willingly 

to  bear  even  death  itself  for  His  sake.  So  S.  Ambrose  (ui  supra), 
and  S.  Gregory  in  Cant  iii.  5.  That  Christ  might  in  the  day  of 
judgment  convict  Jews  and  reprobates  of  impiety  and  ingratitude, 
in  neglecting  such  great  grace.  So  S.  Augustine.  All  theologians 
teach  us  (as  well  as  S.  Cyril,  xii.  58)  that  Christ  carried  these 
wounds  into  heaven,  and  will  retain  them  for  ever.  See  Zech.  xiii. 
6,  John  xix.  37.  It  was  miraculously  so  ordered  by  God  that  these 
wounds  interfered  not  with  the  actions  and  motions  of  His  Body. 
(See  Suarez,  iii.  part9  Qucest.  xliv.,  Disput.  xlvii.  art  4,  sect.  2.) 

S.  Augustine  accordingly  thinks  (de  Civ . xxii.  20)  that  it  will  be 
thus  with  the  wounds  of  the  martyrs.  He  thus  writes,  “ Are  we  so 
inspired  with  love  for  the  martyrs  as  to  wish  to  behold  in  their 
bodies  the  scars  of  the  wounds  which  they  suffered  for  Christ? 
And  it  may  be  we  shall  see  them.  For  this  will  not  be  a deformity, 
but  an  honour ; and  even  though  some  of  their  limbs  have  been  cut 
off,  yet  will  they  not  appear  without  them  at  the  resurrection.  For 
it  was  said  to  them,  * Not  a hair  of  your  head  shall  perish.'  ” He  adds, 
and  “ these  proofs  of  their  virtue  must  not  be  counted  as  defects.” 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  APOSTLES  CHRIST^  VICARS. 


269 


S.  Cyril  (ut  supra)  seems  to  deny  this ; but  he  is  not  speaking  of 
martyrs,  but  of  those  who  have  some  natural  defect,  as  those  who 
are  blind,  deaf,  &c.  These  will  rise  again  with  all  their  faculties. 

Then  were  the  disciples  glad  when  they  saw  the  Lord \ and  recognised 
Him  by  His  wounds.  S.  Augustine  (de  Civ , xxii.  19)  says,  “The 
brightness  with  which  the  righteous  will  shine  as  the  sun,  seems  to 
have  rather  been  veiled  in  Christ’s  person  than  wanting.  For  man’s 
feeble  sight  could  not  have  endured  it,  when  steadily  looking  at 
Him,  in  order  to  recognise  Him.” 

They  were  glad,  not  only  because  they  saw  that  Christ  was  risen, 
but  also  because  they  hoped  that  all  His  gracious  promises  would 
now  be  made  good. 

Ver.  21. — Then  said  Jesus  to  them  again , Peace  be  unto  you. 
Why  again  ? The  Interlinear  Gloss  says,  “ It  was  a repeated  confir- 
mation, Peace  upon  peace,  according  to  the  prophet.”  Bede  says, 
“ He  repeats  it,  because  the  virtue  of  charity  is  twofold,  or  because 
He  is  the  peace  who  makes  both  one.”  The  Gloss,  “He  offers 
peace,  who  came  for  the  sake  of  peace;  and  He  repeats  His  words 
to  show  that  all  things  whether  in  heaven  or  in  earth  are  restored  to 
peace  through  Him.”  S.  Chrysostom,  “ Because  they  were  waging 
an  unappeasable  contest  with  the  Jews.”  He  proclaims  peace  in 
order  to  console  them,  and  sets  forth  also  the  power  of  the  cross, 
by  which  He  drave  away  all  sorrow,  and  conferred  every  good, 
which  is  peace.  But  a further  joy  was  announced  to  the  women,  for 
they  had  to  bear  the  curse,  “ in  sorrow  shalt  thou  bring  forth,”  and 
they  were  indeed  in  sorrow. 

As  My  Father  hath  sent  Me , even  so  send  I you.  With  like  power, 
authority,  end,  mode,  and  love. 

Observe  here  by  this  word  ‘as’  Christ  in  a manner  puts  His 
Apostles  on  an  equality  with  Himself,  that  is  proportionately,  as  His 
successors  and  vicars.  This  word  signifies  likeness  in  office ; with 
the  same  power  and  special  authority  with  which  the  Father  sent  Me 
to  found  His  Church,  do  I send  you  as  its  teachers  and  rulers  (as  I 
am  Myself),  that  ye  may  have  power  to  remit  sin,  as  I also  have. 
So  Rupertus,  S.  Cyril,  Theophylact,  who  maintain  that  by  these  words 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


270 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XX. 


Christ  made  His  Apostles  His  Vicars,  the  teachers  and  pastors  of  the 
world,  and  communicated  to  them  His  own  office  and  authority, 
that  is  to  say,  all  ecclesiastical  authority,  in  fact  made  them  Bishops. 
But  Turrianus  thinks  that  they  were  created  Bishops  on  the  day  of 
Pentecost,  as  he  writes  in  his  notes  on  the  Apostolic  Constitution, 
vi.  n.  Bellarmine  (de  Rom.  Pontiff  i.  24),  following  Turrecremata, 
thinks  that  only  S.  Peter  was  ordained  Bishop  by  our  Lord,  and  that 
the  other  Apostles  were  ordained  by  S.  Peter.  Suarez  considers  it 
more  probable  that  all  the  Apostles  were  ordained  Bishops  by  Christ, 
though  not  certain  as  to  time  and  place  (see  Tract  de  Fidey  Disput.  v. 
sect  1 num.  8).  S.  Augustine  takes  this  latter  view  (Quasi,  xcviii.  in 
Quast.  N.  and  Vet.  Test.)  (2.)  The  word  ‘as1  signifies  similarity  of 
origin.  The  beginning  of  Christ’s  mission,  as  also  that  of  the 
Apostles,  was  God  Himself.  (3.)  It  signifies  likeness  of  object  or 
end,  that  is,  the  propagation  of  the  faith  and  the  salvation  of  the 
world.  So  S.  Cyril  and  Leontius.  (4.)  Likeness  of  mode,  that  ye 
may  confirm  your  teaching  by  miracles,  as  I have  confirmed  Mine. 
(5.)  Likeness  of  mutual  love.  As  the  Father  sent  Me  to  shed  My 
blood  from  love  of  Him,  with  the  same  love  do  I send  you.  For  it 
is  a mark  of  the  supreme  love  of  God  when  He  makes  any  one  his 
witness  and  martyr. 

Hear  S.  Gregory.  “ In  sending  you  forth  among  the  perils  of 
persecutors,  I love  you  with  the  same  love  that  the  Father  had  to 
Me,  when  He  sent  Me  to  endure  My  Passion.” 

Ver.  22. — And  when  He  had  said  this , He  breathed  on  them , and 
said  unto  them , Receive  ye  the  Holy  Ghost.  Why  did  He  breathe  on 
them?  (1.)  To  signify  the  nature  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  proceeding 
both  from  Him  and  the  Father.  For  as  a man  by  breathing  on 
another  imparts  to  him  his  breath,  so  the  Father  and  the  Son  by 
breathing  produce  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  communicate  to  Him  their 
Spirit  and  Godhead.  So  S.  Augustine  (in  loc.)y  Cyril,  Bede,  and  others. 
This  breathing  was  not  the  Holy  Spirit  Himself,  but  a sign  of  Him : 
so  that  it  means,  Receive  by  this  breathing,  as  by  a sign  and  instru- 
mental cause,  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

(2.)  To  signify  that  the  Holy  Spirit  was  consubstantial  with 


Digitized  by  VjOOyIv 


BREATHING  THE  HOLY  GHOST. 


271 


Himself  and  the  Father.  (3.)  To  show  that  it  was  He  who  first 
breathed  into  Adam  the  breath  of  life.  As  if  He  would  say,  I first  gave 
Adam  his  natural  life  by  breathing  on  him,  so  by  breathing  on  you, 
do  I give  you  that  Holy  Spirit  which  bestows  on  you  supernatural 
and  divine  life.  I who  first  created  men,  am  now  their  re-creator 
and  restorer.  See  S.  Cyril  (Lib.  xii.  56),  Leontius,  Euthymius,  and 
S.  Athanasius  (Quasi,  lxiv.  ad  Antiochum).  (4.)  S.  Cyril  and  S.  Basil 
(de  Spir.  Sancto , cap . xvi.)  and  S.  Ambrose  (Serm.  xx.  in  Ps.  cxviii. 
[cxix.])  say  that  Christ,  by  these  words,  signified  that  He  breathed  into 
Adam  not  only  breath  but  grace,  and  because  he  had  lost  grace  by 
sin  He  restored  it  in  this  way  to  the  Apostles,  and  through  them  to 
all  men,  being  in  fact  the  restorer  of  grace.  He  seems  to  say, 
Receive  ye  the  Spirit  which  ye  lost  in  Adam’s  person  by  sin. 
Breathe  Him  forth  on  penitents  in  the  sacrament  of  penance, 
remit  through  Him  their  sins  and  restore  them  to  the  life  of 
the  Spirit  by  grace.  Hear  S.  Cyril : “ Man  was  at  first  made  by  the 
Word  of  God,  and  God  breathed  into  him  the  breath  of  life,  and 
strengthened  him  by  the  imparting  of  His  Spirit.  But  since  he  fell 
by  disobedience,  God  the  Father  refashioned  him,  and  brought  him 
to  new  life  by  His  Son.  And  we  may  learn  that  as  it  was  He  who 
in  the  beginning  created  our  nature,  and  sealed  it  by  His  Holy 
Spirit,  so  when  He  began  the  renewal  of  our  nature,  He  gives  the 
Spirit  to  the  disciples  by  breathing  on  them,  that  just  as  we  were 
created  by  Him  at  first,  we  may  in  like  manner  also  be  renewed  by 
Him. 

Symbolically.  This  breathing  represents  sin  as  a black  cloud. 
For  as  a cloud  is  dispersed  by  the  wind,  so  is  every  cloud  of  sin 
driven  away  by  the  breath  of  the  Spirit.  See  Is.  xliv.  And  again,  it 
represents  the  judiciary  power  of  remitting  sins,  which  is  exercised 
by  the  breath  of  the  voice  which  says,  I absolve  thee. 

Tropologically.  It  denotes  that  a Priest,  in  order  to  remit  sin,  should 
possess  a mighty  spirit,  charity,  and  zeal,  so  as  to  breathe  on 
penitents  and  lead  them  to  true  penitence,  sorrow,  and  repentance, 
and  thus  dispose  them  for  the  remission  of  their  sins.  And  so  we 
see  Confessors  who  are  gifted  with  mighty  resolution,  wound  with 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


272 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XX. 


the  spirit  of  their  mouth  many  and  great  sinners,  and  convert  them 
to  holiness.  Just  as  we  read  that  S.  Ambrose,  when  hearing  the  sins 
of  those  who  confessed  to  him,  was  wont  to  weep,  and  thus  by  his 
own  tears  lead  them  to  tears  and  contrition. 

Receive  ye  the  Holy  Ghost . The  Apostles  had  already  received 
the  Holy  Ghost  in  Baptism  and  Holy  Communion.  But  they  were 
about  to  receive  His  fulness,  according  to  Christ's  promise,  at 
Pentecost,  in  order  to  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles,  when  the 
Holy  Spirit  descending  on  them  visibly  in  form  of  fiery  tongues,  filled 
them  to  the  full  with  all  His  gifts,  and  especially  with  the  power  of 
preaching.  But  here  He  confers  on  them  the  Holy  Ghost  for 
another  purpose,  the  remission  of  sin.  “Receive  ye  the  Holy 
Ghost,”  that  is,  power  to  remit  sins  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  So 
Theophylact,  Euthymius,  and  Rupertus.  This  signifies  that  He 
came  as  was  prophesied  by  Isaiah  (xxvii.  9),  and  that  both  Christ 
and  the  Father  gave  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  from  hence  it  is  clear 
that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  given,  not  merely  by  grace  making  us 
acceptable  (to  God),  but  also  by  grace  given  freely,  as  is  the  power 
of  remitting  sins,  which  is  given  to  priests  even  in  mortal  sin,  when 
they  are  ordained.  For  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  primary  author  of 
grace  who  works  in  the  sacrament,  and  by  it  remits  sins,  even  though 
its  minister  be  an  ungodly  man.  Whence  Cyril  and  Chrysostom 
thus  expound  the  passage,  Receive  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  is,  the 
power  of  remitting  sin  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  co-operating  with  you  in 
that  sacrament  and  remitting  sins.  And  again,  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
you  must  understand  with  S.  Augustine  (in  loc.\  and  S.  Ambrose 
(Serm.  x.  in  Ps.  cxviii.  [cxix.]),  the  very  grace  and  charity  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  For  this  was  infused  into  the  Apostles  more  fully  and 
abundantly,  and  is  likewise  by  the  power  of  the  sacrament  of  order 
infused  into  priests  at  their  ordination  (unless  they  put  an  obstacle 
and  choose  to  continue  in  their  sins,  and  refuse  to  be  contrite  for 
their  past  sins),  so  that  they  may  duly  and  without  sin  administer 
the  sacrament  of  penitence,  and  absolve  sinners.  For  a priest  who 
absolves  others  ought  to  be  free  from  sin ; if  not,  he  is  guilty  of  sin, 
and  yet  truly  absolves  sinners.  From  these  words  it  is  clear  that  the 


ed  by 


Google 


THE  TRIBUNAL  OF  PENANCE. 


273 


Holy  Ghost  has  the  primary  and  highest  power  of  forgiving  sins, 
and  that  He  communicated  this  power  to  the  Apostles,  and  accord- 
ingly that  He  Himself  is  truly  God.  (So  S.  Basil,  Lib . v.  contra 
Eunomium ; S.  Ambrose,  Lib.  iii.  ch.  19,  de  Spir.  Sancto , and  S. 
Chrysostom,  Horn.  vi.  on  2 Cor.)  The  same  power  is  indeed  com- 
mon to  the  whole  Holy  Trinity,  but  specially  belongs  to  the  Holy 
Ghost,  as  do  Goodness  and  Love,  and  all  the  work  of  sanctification, 
just  as  Power  specially  belongs  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son 
Wisdom,  and  all  its  works. 

2.  Observe  that  the  Holy  Ghost  and  His  power  of  remitting  sins 
are  here  given  them,  not  only  for  their  own  sakes,  as  about  to  be 
judges  of  sinners  in  the  tribunal  of  penitence,  but  also  for  the  sake  of 
penitent  sinners  themselves.  And  consequently  the  same  power  is 
given  even  to  wicked  priests  when  they  are  ordained,  as  the  power 
of  judging  in  a secular  court  can  be  given  to  a wicked  judge.  But  yet 
if  they  dispose  themselves  by  penitence  to  the  right  reception  of  the 
Sacrament  of  Ordination,  they  will  receive  therein  the  Holy  Ghost 
even  to  their  own  sanctification,  to  make  them  the  more  fit  to 
sanctify  others  (penitents,  for  instance),  as  was  here  done  to  the 
Apostles. 

3.  S.  Cyril  (and  Maldonatus  after  him)  remarks  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  was  here  conferred  on  S.  Thomas,  even  though  absent,  and 
with  it  the  consequent  power  of  remitting  sins,  just  as  the  spirit  of 
prophecy  was  given  by  Moses  to  Eldad  and  Medad  who  were  absent 
But  the  contrary  opinion  seems  more  true.  For  Thomas  was  then 
unbelieving  and  incapable  of  receiving  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  accord- 
ingly the  Holy  Ghost  was  given  him  on  the  eighth  day  when  Christ 
appeared  to  him,  and  converted  him  by  showing  him  His  wounds. 
So  Toletus,  Ribera,  and  others. 

Lastly,  notice  this  act  of  Christ  as  an  example  for  ecclesiastical 
ceremonies.  Christ,  by  the  ceremony  of  breathing  on  them,  gave  the 
Apostles  the  Holy  Ghost  and  the  power  of  remitting  sins.  There- 
fore ecclesiastical  ceremonies  are  not  useless,  frivolous,  and  super- 
stitious, but  seemly,  efficacious,  and  sacred. 

Ver.  23. — ■ Whosesoever  sins  ye  remit , they  are  remitted  unto  them , 
VOL.  v.  8 


r 


digitized  by  GOO^IC 


274  S.  JOHN,  C.  XX. 

ana  whosesoever  sins  ye  retain,  they  are  retained . Calvin  twists  and 
turns  this  to  make  it  mean  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  namely, 
that  they  to  whom  ye  preach  the  Gospel,  if  they  believe  it,  will  have 
their  sins  forgiven  by  their  mere  belief.  But  every  one  sees  that  this 
explanation  is  strained,  forced,  foolish,  and  ridiculous.  For  in  this 
way  it  would  not  be  the  Apostles,  but  believers  themselves  who  would 
themselves  remit  their  own  sins,  which  is  absurd.  For  no  one  is 
judge  in  his  own  case,  or  stands  higher  than  himself,  so  as  to  remit 
his  own  sins.  (2.)  These  two  things,  viz.,  preaching  the  Gospel  and 
remitting  sins,  are  clearly  dissimilar  and  distinct,  the  one  being  the 
work  of  an  Apostle  in  preaching,  the  other  the  judicial  act  of  a judge. 
(3.)  The  Gospel  must  be  preached  to  all : and  consequently  this 
absolution  of  Calvin's  must  be  given  even  to  all  the  wicked.  But 
Christ  wishes  not  that  all  sins  should  be  remitted,  but  orders  that 
some  should  be  retained,  and  that  the  Apostles  and  their  successors 
should  be  judges  in  this  matter.  (4.)  Christ  had  already  given  the 
Apostles  power  to  preach  (Luke  x.  1),  and  commanded  them  to 
preach  to  every  creature.  Why  then  should  He  repeat  all  this  in 
such  obscure  and  unintelligible  words  ? 

I say  therefore,  it  is  a matter  of  faith  to  understand  this  passage 
of  the  sacrament  of  penance,  wherein  the  priest,  as  judge,  remits  not 
only  the  punishment  but  also  the  guilt  of  penitents  who  accuse 
themselves  in  confession.  This  is  clear  from  the  words  themselves, 
all’of  which  signify  that  a judicial  power  of  remitting  or  retaining  sins 
was  here  given  to  the  Apostles  as  judges  in  the  tribunal  of  conscience. 
For  so  all  the  Fathers  and  the  whole  Church  in  every  age  understood 
the  words.  See  Council  of  Trent,  sess.  xiv.  can.  3 and  1.  Bellarmine 
quotes  the  testimonies  of  the  Fathers  (JDe  Pcenit.  iii.  2),  and  amongst 
them  S.  Gregory,  who  says,  “They  hold  the  chief  place  in  the 
Divine  judgment,  so  as  in  the  place  of  God  to  retain  some  men’s 
sins,  and  remit  the  sins  of  others.” 

The  meaning  then  is,  “I  give  you  by  the  Spirit  the  power  of 
Order,  which  a man  can  have  even  when  in  sin,  and  I confer  on 
you  at  the  same  time  grace  and  sanctification,  to  enable  you  to 
exercise  this  power  in  a worthy  and  holy  manner,  not  merely  for  the 


Google 


SACRAMENTAL  CONFESSION.  2 75 

salvation  of  others,  but  also  for  your  own.  And  ye  will  really  remit 
sins  as  my  ministers,  and  not  merely  announce  that  they  arc  re- 
mitted, and  whosesoever  sins  ye  retain,  either  with  some,  because 
they  do  not  come  to  you,  or  others  because  ye  will  consider  them 
undeserving  of  absolution,  are  retained  in  heaven  by  God.” 

You  may  say,  Cyril  explains  this  passage  as  speaking  of  the 
preaching  of  the  Gospel.  I reply,  Cyril  does  not  explain  these  latter 
words,  as  speaking  of  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  but  the  former 
words,  “ As  the  Father  sent  Me,  even  so  send  I you.”  But  you  will 
say  again,  Cyril  says  that  sins  are  remitted  in  two  ways,  by  Baptism 
and  repentance.  But  I reply,  “ This  is  true,  but  not  to  the  point 
Christ  is  properly  speaking  of  the  tribunal  of  Penance,  but  Cyril 
extends  His  words  to  include  Baptism.  Christ  is  here  speaking  of 
the  judicial  remission  of  sins,  which  is  to  be  had  specially,  not  in 
Baptism,  but  in  the  sacrament  of  Penance  only.”  See  S.  Chrysostom 
(Lib.  iii.  and  vi.  De  Sacerdotid)y  where  he  shows  that  priests  are  of 
higher  honour  than  not  only  kings  but  even  angels,  who  have  not 
the  power  of  remitting  sins. 

Moreover,  Christ  by  here  instituting  the  tribunal  of  Penance, 
sanctioned,  in  this  very  way,  Sacramental  Confession,  and  enjoins 
it  by  Divine  right.  For  sins  cannot  be  remitted  in  this  tribunal 
unless  they  are  known,  nor  can  they  be  known,  unless  they  are 
confessed,  for  they  are  frequently  secret ; nay  more,  hidden  in  the 
mind.  It  is  therefore  necessary  that  the  penitent  should  act  as 
his  own  accuser,  and  should  be  at  the  same  time  a criminal,  an 
accuser,  and  a witness  against  himself,  and  should  humbly  ask 
pardon  of  the  priest,  as  his  judge,  for  the  sins  whereof  he  accuses 
himself,  and  for  which  he  is  penitent.  But  if  the  priest  sees  that 
he  is  truly  penitent,  he  will  pronounce  the  sentence  of  absolution, 
and  will,  in  the  Name  of  Christ,  as  His  Vicar,  pardon  all  his  sins. 
For  Christ  ratifies  the  sentence  of  His  priest,  and  pardons  every- 
thing which  His  priest  pardons,  and  what  he  retains,  Christ  also 
retains.  For  Christ  in  the  Gospel  often  bids  men  to  repent  of  their 
sins.  But  this  they  should  do  in  the  way  which  Christ  instituted, 
that  is,  by  submitting  to  the  Sacrament  of  Penance,  that  is,  by  con- 


digitized  by  C joogle 


2y6 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XX. 


fessing  their  sins  to  the  priest,  and  asking  him  for  absolution.  See 
Council  of  Trent,  sess.  xiv.  cap.  v.  Cajetan  therefore  is  wrong  in 
saying  that  Confession  is  not  here  enjoined.  This  error  is  a heresy 
since  that  Council,  but  Cajetan  lived  before  it 

And  whosesoever  sins  ye  retain , they  are  retained \ This  does  not 
signify  merely  a refusal  of  absolution,  but  positive  power.  For  it 
means,  Those  whom  ye  count  unworthy  of  absolution,  on  account 
of  their  unfitness,  whom  ye  reject,  and  consider  guilty  of  sin,  and 
deserving  of  hell,  God  will  judge  in  like  manner,  who  alone 
primarily  and  by  His  own  authority  forgives  or  retains  sins.  It 
belongs  to  God  alone  to  condemn  an  offence  against  Himself.  But 
in  this  matter  He  appoints  priests  to  be  as  it  were  His  Vicars. 
See  Matt,  xviii.  18.  If  a priest  sees  that  a penitent  has  not 
serious  sorrow  for  his  sins,  or  no  serious  purpose  of  amendment,  as 
refusing,  e.g.,  to  give  up  his  concubine,  or  other  occasions  of  sin, 
or  who  will  not  restore  the  good  name  or  the  wealth  which  he  has 
stolen  from  his  neighbour,  the  priest  ought  to  refuse  such  a one 
absolution,  to  judge  that  he  is  unfit  for  absolution,  and  that  he  must 
abide  in  his  sin,  and  incur  the  guilt  of  hell. 

Lastly,  observe  that  though  the  Apostles  were  ordained  priests 
before  His  Passion,  and  at  His  last  supper  after  the  institution  of 
the  Eucharist  with  these  words,  Do  this , &c.,  yet  they  then  received 
only  the  power  of  consecrating  the  Eucharist;  but  after  Christ’s 
resurrection  they  received  from  Him  another  power,  that  of  remitting 
sins.  These  are  two  different  powers,  and  can  be  divided  and 
separated  from  each  other.  For  Christ  had  this  pre-eminent  power 
of  appointing  priests  in  a different  way  from  that  in  which  they 
were  afterwards  to  be  appointed.  For  now  in  the  ordination  of 
priests  the  matter  is  the  Chalice  and  Paten  with  the  Bread  and 
Wine,  the  form  being,  “Receive  thou  power  to  offer  sacrifice.,, 
And  when  the  bishop  delivers  these  vessels  to  any  one,  pronouncing 
these  words,  he  makes  him  a perfect  priest,  and  confers  on  him 
both  the  power  of  remitting  sins  and  also  of  offering  sacrifice.  So 
that  when  he  says  afterwards,  “ Receive  thou  power  to  remit,  sins” 
these  words  are  not  of  the  essence  of  the  form,  but  merely  declare 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


UNBELIEF  OF  S.  THOMAS. 


277 


the  power  which  was  given  in  those  former  words.  (See  Soto,  Contr . 
Paludanem  in  iv.  Dist.  24,  Quasi.  L,  art.  4 ; and  Gregory  de  Valentia, 
Tract  de  Or  dine,  disp . 9,  Quasi . 1 , punct.  5.) 

Ver.  24. — But  Thomas , one  of  the  twelve, , called  Didymus , was  not 
with  them  when  Jesus  came.  Didymus  means  a twin.  See  notes  on 
chap.  xi.  16.  But  here  he  is  so  called  (double,  doubtful)  because  he 
wavered  and  doubted  as  to  Christ’s  resurrection.  He  was  at  that 
time  weaker  than  the  other  Apostles,  but  afterwards  (after  Christ 
again  appeared)  was  bolder  and  more  full  of  faith  than  all  of  them, 
inasmuch  as  he  alone  traversed  nearly  the  whole  world  in  preaching 
the  Gospel.  Stapleton  (de  Vita  Thoma)  says  that  he  went  to  the 
furthest  part  of  India,  to  Abyssinia  and  China,  and  even  to  America. 

Was  not  with  them.  S.  Chrysostom,  Theophylact,  and  Euthymius 
suppose  that  having  fled  away  with  the  other  Apostles,  he  had  not  yet 
returned.  But  S.  Augustine,  Bede,  Lyranus,  D.  Thomas,  and  others 
say  in  reply  that  he  was  with  the  other  Apostles  when  the  two 
disciples  returned  from  Emmaus,  but  that  he  disbelieved  their  story, 
and  went  away.  It  is  supposed  that  when  S.  Luke  says  (xxiv.  ix), 
“their  words  seemed  to  them  as  idle  tales,”  he  was  referring  to 
S.  Thomas. 

Ver.  25. — The  other  disciples  therefore  said  unto  him9  We  have  seen 
the  Lord.  But  he  said  unto  them , Except  I shall  see  in  His  hands 
the  print  of  the  nails , and  put  my  finger  into  the  print  of  the  nails , 
and  thrust  my  hand  into  His  side , I will  not  believe. 

Thomas  seemed  in  this  — (1)  by  unbelief,  (2)  by  obstinacy, 
(3)  by  pride,  (4)  by  irreverence  (for  when  all  the  other  Apostles 
said  that  He  had  risen,  he  obstinately  stood  out,  and  refused  to 
believe,  (5)  by  presumption,  because  he  would  not  believe,  unless 
he  thrust  his  hands  into  the  wounds  (canst  thou  then  presume,  O 
Thomas,  to  lay  down  laws  for  Christ?),  (6)  by  persisting  in  this 
unbelief  for  eight  days  when,  it  may  be,  the  Mother  of  Christ  urged 
him  to  believe — to  be  not  merely  unbelieving  as  to  the  mode  <of  the 
resurrection  (as  S.  Ambrose  supposes),  but  even  as  to  its  truth,  as 
though  the  other  Apostles  were  taken  in  and  deceived,  having  seen 
only  a ghost  or  phantom,  and  not  Christ  Himselfc  (See  Origen, 


igitized  by  Google 


278 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XX. 


Lib . ii.  Contr.  Celsum ; S.  Augustine,  Lib . xvi.  Contra  Faust  cap. 
33  ; and  S.  Gregory,  Horn,  xxvi.) 

Besides,  this  unbelief  of  S.  Thomas*  arose  partly  from  his  not 
believing  Christ  to  be  God.  For  had  he  believed  this,  he  would 
easily  have  understood  that  Christ  could  have  raised  His  Body  to 
life  again,  and  it  is  surprising  that  Cyril  should  say  that  Thomas 
believed  Him  to  be  God ; and  it  partly  arose  from  His  excessive 
sorrow,  especially  because  he  alone  had  not  seen  Christ  at  the  same 
time  as  the  other  Apostles.  This  wounded  him  much,  and  caused 
him  to  utter  these  bitter  words.  So  Cyril,  xii  57.  But  God  allowed 
it  to  be  thus,  in  order  that  Thomas  and  we  should  be  confirmed  in 
humility,  and  in  belief  in  the  resurrection  by  this  fresh  appearance 
of  Christ.  So  S.  Gregory,  Horn,  xxvi.,  S.  Augustine,  Sertn.  clxi. 
(opus  spurium),  and  others. 

The  print  In  Vulgate,  fixura,  “ the  driving  in  ” the  mark  which 
the  nails  made.  (Pseudo)- Augustine  (Serm.  clix.)  says,  “He  was 
seeking  for  the  hands  and  the  side,  and  while  he  was  too  curiously 
dwelling  on  the  wounds,  he  risked  the  death  of  his  faith.  The  Lord 
wished  him  to  see  Him  lest  he  should  lose  his  soul  by  unbelief.” 

Ver.  26 — And  after  eight  days . The  eighth  day  after  the  Lord’s 
resurrection,  the  Octave  of  the  Passover,  when  we  commemorate  this 
mystery,  and  read  this  Gospel.  And  from  this  S.  Cyril  observes 
that  the  Apostles,  from  these  appearances  of  Christ,  began  from  this 
time  to  hold  the  assemblies  of  the  Church  on  the  Lord’s  day,  and 
to  consecrate  it,  as  it  were,  because  He  rose  on  that  day,  and  thus 
guided  the  Apostles  to  observe  the  Lord’s  day  instead  of  the 
Sabbath. 

Again  His  disciples  were  within , in  that  upper  chamber  before  men- 
tioned. It  is  therefore  far  from  probable,  as  S.  Jerome  (in  Matt, 
ult.),  Rupertus,  and  Ribera  here  suppose,  that  Christ  appeared  to  S. 
Thomas  and  the  Apostles,  not  in  Jerusalem,  but  in  Galilee,  where  He 
afterwards  appeared,  not  only  to  the  Apostles,  but  to  all  the  disciples. 

And  Thomas  with  them : then  came  Jesus , the  doors  being  shut,  and 
stood  in  the  midst  and  said,  Peace  be  unto  you.  Notice  here,  the 
wondrous  condescension  of  Christ,  who,  in  order  to  convert  this 


Digitized  by 


C ogle 


DID  THOMAS  TOUCH  CHRIST? 


279 


unbelieving  and  obstinate  Thomas,  offered  Himself  a second  time, 
not  only  to  be  seen,  but  also  to  be  handled  by  him.  And  this  He 
did,  not  for  his  sake  only,  but  for  the  sake  of  the  other  Apostles,  to 
strengthen  both  them  and  us  also  in  the  belief  of  His  resurrection. 

Ver.  27. — Then  saith  He  to  Thomas , Reach  hither  thy  finger , and 
behold  My  handsy  and  reach  hither  thy  hand \ and  thrust  it  into  My 
side . Behold  the  kindness  of  Christ  in  humbling  Himself  to  all 
Thomas'  requests,  and  in  all  things  complying  with  his  wishes,  in 
order  to  convert  him.  See,  says  S.  Chrysostom,  how  for  one  single 
soul  He  displays  His  wounds,  and  because  he  was  somewhat  dull  of 
comprehension  seeks  to  give  him  proof  by  means  of  the  dullest  of 
his  senses,  I mean  his  touch. 

And  be  not  faithless , but  believing . Thou  thinkest,  forsooth,  that  I 
did  not  know  what  thou  saidst  of  Me  when  I was  not  present.  But 
rest  assured  that  I knew,  and  was  present  to  hear  thy  words  of 
unbelief.  Do  then,  as  thou  hast  said,  I offer  thee  My  wounded 
hands  and  side  to  touch  and  handle,  nay  more,  that  thou  mayest 
measure  them  with  thy  hand,  that  so  thou  mayest  lay  aside  thy 
unbelief,  and  believe  henceforth  that  I have  risen,  I the  very  same 
that  hung  on  the  Cross,  and  no  other.  And  in  this  way  Christ  heals 
another  wound  of  unbelief,  for  He  shows  that  He  knows  even  all 
secrets,  and  is  a searcher  of  hearts,  and  consequently  God.  He 
therefore  radically  cures  the  disease,  for  Thomas  did  not  believe 
that  Christ  had  risen,  because  he  did  not  believe  Him  to  be  God. 

It  may  be  asked  whether  Thomas  really  touched  Christ's  wounds. 
The  Gloss  doubts  it.  Euthymius  denies  it.  But  S.  Augustine  (in 
loc .)  thinks  the  contrary.  For  he  says,  “ He  saw  and  touched  the  man, 
and  confessed  the  God,  whom  he  neither  saw  nor  touched ; but  by 
means  of  that  which  he  saw  and  touched,  his  doubts  were  all  removed 
and  he  believed.  So,  too,  S.  Cyril,  Theophylact,  and  Bede,  and  S. 
Chrysostom  seems  to  be  of  the  same  opinion.  Nor  can  it  be  thought 
that  when  the  Lord  said,  “ Reach  hither  thy  finger,”  John  would 
have  omitted  to  state,  if  this  had  not  been  done,  and  that  Thomas 
believed  without  having  touched  Him. 

Besides,  this  was  an  express  command,  which  Thomas  doubtless 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


280 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XX. 


obeyed.  And  He  intended  to  leave  thus  a convincing  proof  of  His 
resurrection  to  believers  of  all  ages.  Whence  S.  Augustine  (Serm. 
cxlvii.  [a/,  ccxlii.]),  “ He  wished  to  exhibit  in  His  flesh  the  scars  of 
His  wounds  to  some  who  doubted,  to  heal  the  wound  of  their 
unbelief.”  And  S.  Ambrose  (in  ult.  Luca),  “ He  would  teach  me  by 
His  touch,  as  Paul  also  taught”  Hear  S.  Gregory  (Horn,  xxvi.) : 
“ This  took  place  not  by  chance,  but  by  Divine  ordering.  For  the 
mercy  of  God  wrought  in  wondrous  wise,  so  that  the  doubting 
disciple,  by  touching  the  wounds  in  his  Master’s  body,  healed  in  us 
the  wounds  of  unbelief.  For  the  unbelief  of  Thomas  availed  more 
to  confirm  our  faith,  than  even  the  faith  of  the  disciples  who  believed. 
For  while  he  is  by  his  touch  brought  back  to  belief,  our  mind,  put- 
ting aside  all  doubt,  is  confirmed  in  the  faith.”  Again  [PseudoJ- 
Augustine,  Serm,  clxi.  [clxxii.  in  Append.],  “ Thomas  being  a holy, 
believing,  and  righteous  man,  carefully  inquired  into  all  these  points, 
not  as  having  any  doubt  himself,  but  to  do  away  with  the  slightest 
suspicion  of  unbelief!  For  it  would  have  sufficed  for  his  own  faith 
to  have  seen  Him  whom  he  knew.  But  it  was  for  us  that  he  brought 
it  about  that  he  touched  Him  whom  he  beheld.  So  that  we  might 
perchance  say  that  our  eyes  were  deceived,  but  we  could  not  say 
that  our  hands  had  missed  their  mark.  For  we  might  have  some 
doubt  as  to  what  we  see  in  the  dazzling  glory  of  the  resurrection, 
but  we  can  have  no  doubt  as  to  what  we  touch.” 

But  it  may  be  urged,  Christ  said,  “ See  My  hands' * He  did  not 
say,  Touch  My  hands.  “ Thomas  therefore  saw,  but  did  not  touch 
them.”  I answer,  By  seeing  is  meant,  you  may  see  by  your  very 
touch — may  know  assuredly  that  I who  was  crucified  have  risen — 
the  very  same  person.  “ The  sight,”  says  S.  Augustine  (in  loc.),  “is 
a kind  of  general  sense,  and  the  noblest  of  all,”  and  is  here  taken 
for  any  sense,  even  that  of  touch.  See  notes  on  Ex.  xx.  io. 

2.  But  it  is  said,  M The  glorified  Body  of  Christ  is  subtile,  and 
cannot  be  touched.”  S.  Cyril,  Chrysostom,  Leontius,  Theophylact  say 
that  it  was  by  divine  ordering  here  touched  by  Thomas,  to  furnish 
proof  of  the  resurrection.  For  this  kind  of  resistance,  which  exists 
in  a body  (wherewith  one  body  resists  another,  and  is  therefore 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


CONFESSION  OF  CHRIST’S  GODHEAD. 


28l 

capable  of  being  touched)  which  is  the  property  of  bulk,  is  in  the 
power  of  Christ  and  the  Blessed,  so  as  to  remain,  or  be  taken  away 
by  God,  as  they  wish.  And  so  also  as  regards  their  visibility,  so 
that  Christ  was  seen  when  He  wished  it,  and  not  seen  when  He  did 
not  wish  it  See  notes  on  Luke  ult  ver.  39. 

This  finger  of  St.  Thomas  is  said  to  be  preserved,  with  many  other 
relics,  in  the  Church  of  Santa  Croce  at  Rome. 

From  Christ’s  own  words,  “Thrust  thy  hand  into  My  side,”  it 
appears  that  this  wound  was  very  large,  and  Thomas,  astonished 
that  this  wound  was  inflicted  for  him,  exclaimed  “ My  Lord  and  my 
God*1  Many  Saints,  as  S.  Bernard,  S.  Francis,  and  others,  have  longed 
to  enter  through  that  wound  into  the  heart  of  Christ.  See  S. 
Bernard,  Serm . lxii.  in  Cant, 

Ver.  28. — Thomas  answered  and  said  unto  Him\  My  Lord  and 
my  God,  This  was  after  he  had  fully  ascertained  that  it  was  indeed 
Christ  Himself,  who  had  received  these  wounds  on  the  cross,  and 
who  was  now  alive  again.  See  Tertullian,  de  Attima , cap.  xxviii. ; S. 
Ambrose,  in  Ps,  xliii.  (xliv.) ; S.  Hilary,  de  Trinit,  Lib,  iii. ; S.  Cyril, 
xii.  58 ; S.  Gregory,  Horn,  xxvi. 

My  Lord  and  my  God,  That  is,  Thou  art  my  Lord  and  my  God. 
Thus  showing  that  He  was  Very  and  true  God  by  nature.  Thomas 
here  humbly  and  penitently  confesses  and  condemns  his  former 
incredulity,  with  great  profession  of  faith,  hope,  penitence,  and  love. 
By  the  word  “ Lord  ” he  confesses  Christ’s  human  nature,  by  the  word 
“God  ” His  divine  nature.  “ I,”  he  would  say,  “ because  I believed 
not  that  thou  wast  God,  did  not  believe  that  Thou  hadst  risen.  But 
now  I both  believe  that  Thou  art  God,  and  that  by  the  power 
of  Thy  Godhead  Thou  didst  raise  Thy  Body  to  life  again.”  So  St. 
Hilary  (Lib,  vii.  de  Trinit,)}  and  S.  Ambrose  (in  Ps,  xliii.),  who  also 
adds  that  the  word  “ Lord  ” signifies  that  Christ  is  our  Redeemer  as 
having  purchased  us  by  His  Blood,  and  thus  becoming  our  Lord 
by  the  right  of  purchase  and  redemption.  By  these  words,  Suarez 
says  that  Thomas  offered  Christ  the  adoration  of  Latria . As  S. 
Augustine  said,  “ He  saw  and  touched  the  man,”  &c.  (see  above  on 
ver.  27).  Consequently  the  fifth  (Ecumenical  Council  (in  Constit, 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


282 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XX. 


Vigilii  Papa)  anathematise  Theodore  of  Mopsuestia,  who  maintained 
that  these  words  were  not  a confession  of  Christ’s  Godhead,  but 
merely  an  expression  of  astonishment.  Note  the  words,  “ My  Lord,” 
&c.  For  though  Christ  is  the  Lord  and  God  of  all,  yet  He  is 
especially  mine,  having  as  the  good  Shepherd  sought  me,  as  a sheep 
that  was  lost,  and  I love  and  venerate  Him  in  return  from  my 
inmost  soul,  as  specially  my  Lord  and  my  God.  Thou,  O Jesus, 
art  my  God  and  my  Lord,  because  by  these  Thy  wounds,  which  I 
have  now  touched,  and  know  to  be  most  real,  Thou  hast  procured 
and  obtained  for  me  that  faith  with  which  I believe  that  Thou  hast 
really  risen,  and  this  hope  of  obtaining  grace  and  glory  through  the 
merit  of  Thy  wounds,  and  such  fervent  charity  as  to  love  Thee  most 
ardently  as  my  God  and  Lord,  and  to  offer  and  devote  myself 
entirely  to  Thee  as  Thy  servant  for  ever,  so  as  henceforth  to  wish 
to  do  nothing,  but  that  which  pleases,  lauds,  and  glorifies  Thee. 
Would  that  I could  lay  open  and  breathe  forth  this  my  heartfelt 
feeling  to  the  whole  world  ! Would  that  I could  proclaim  and  set 
forth  to  all  the  world  this  my  faith,  hope,  and  love  towards  Thee  ! 
Thus  S.  Francis  frequently  used  to  say,  “ My  God  and  my  all and 
the  Royal  Prophet,  “ What  have  I in  heaven  but  Thee,”  &c.,  Ps. 
lxxiii.  24. 

Ver.  29 .—Jesus  saith  unto  him , Because  thou  hast  seen  Me  (that  is, 
touched  and  thus  surely  known),  thou  hast  believed.  Blessed  are  they 
who  have  not  seen , and  yet  have  believed.  Because  there  “ faith  has 
greater  merit,  where  human  reason  does  not  afford  a test,”  says  S. 
Gregory.  He  used  the  past  tense,  because  many  had  already 
believed,  but  does  not  exclude  the  present  and  the  future.  They 
both  are,  and  will  be  blessed,  who  believe  in  Me,  without  seeing. 
S.  Augustine  (in  loc.)  adds  that  they  who  will  believe,  did  already 
believe  in  God’s  foreknowledge  and  predestination.  But  this  remark 
is  more  subtle  and  acute  than  solid. 

Hence  S.  Gregory  (L Tom.  xxvi.),  S .Hilary  (de  Trinit.  lib.  xil),  and 
S.  Augustine  (in  loc.),  say  that  Thomas  saw  one  thing  and  believed 
another : he  saw  that  Christ  had  risen,  he  believed  that  He  was  God, 
and  consequently  had  raised  Himself.  By  touching  My  human 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


CHIEF  OBJECTS  OF  FAITH. 


283 


nature  which  has  been  raised  (Christ  would  say)  thou  hast  believed 
My  Godhead  which  lay  hid  within,  and  which  raised  it  up.  For 
the  resurrection  of  Christ  had  confirmed  all  His  teachings,  one  of 
which  was  that  He  was  the  Messiah  the  Son  of  God,  who  would  die 
on  the  cross  for  the  salvation  of  men,  and  on  the  third  day  rise 
again.  All  which  Thomas  believed.  Again,  that  which  comes 
under  our  senses,  which  we  see  and  touch,  we  can  believe  on  divine 
authority,  but  for  another  formal  reason.  We  see  a thing  because 
we  behold  it  with  our  eyes,  but  we  believe  it  because  God  has 
revealed  it,  especially  if  our  senses  can  err,  or  if  the  matter  involve 
anything  which  is  not  seen,  as  was  the  case  with  the  resurrection 
of  Christ,  which  was  already  past,  for  Thomas  here  doubted  and  was 
convinced  of  Chrises  resurrection. 

Thou  wilt  reply,  that  S.  Augustine  says,  Tract  xl.  (on  S.  John), 
Faith  is  believing  what  thou  seest  not  I answer,  This  is  true  in  the 
sense  that  the  chief  material  objects  of  faith  are  such  as  cannot  be 
seen.  But  the  formal  object  of  faith,  that  is  to  say,  divine  revela- 
tion, is  always  of  such  a kind,  that  is  to  say  invisible.  And  there- 
fore Thomas,  so  far  as  he  beheld  Christ,  did  not  formally  believe  it 
But  because  he  saw  and  heard  Christ,  when  raised,  assert  the  same 
things  he  believed  God,  who  by  the  mouth  of  Christ  and  die 
Apostles,  stated  and  revealed  to  him  that  it  was  no  phantom  in  the 
form  of  Christ  (as  he  had  before  supposed),  but  Christ  Himself  who 
had  really  risen  and  appeared  to  the  Apostles.  Just  as  we  say, 
“ Because  thou  hast  seen  miracles,  because  thou  hast  heard  the 
Gospel  preached,  therefore  thou  hast  believed.”  The  word  therefore 
does  not  signify  the  reason  or  the  formal  cause  of  belief  (for  that  is 
only  the  Divine.  Revelation),  but  only  the  predisposing  cause  which 
moves  us  to  believe. 

But  thirdly,  the  words  can  be  explained  as  signifying  merely 
assent,  and  not  properly  faith.  Just  as  we  believe  the  things  we  see 
and  know.  So  Toletus.  Hear  S.  Gregory : “ He  touched  the  man, 
and  confessed  Him  to  be  God;”  and  Theophylact,  “He  who  before 
was  unbelieving,  showed  himself,  after  he  had  touched  His  side,  to 
be  an  excellent  theologian,  in  asserting  the  twofold  nature,  and  the 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


284 


S.  JOHN,  c.  XX. 


one  Person  of  Christ.  For  by  calling  Him  Lord  he  confessed  His 
human  nature,  and  by  calling  Him  God  he  confessed  the  divine 
Nature  in  one  and  the  same  Person.” 

Ver.  30. — And  many  other  signs  truly  did  Jesus  in  the  presence  of 
His  disciples , which  are  not  written  in  this  hook . Both  through  His 
whole  life,  and  specially  after  His  resurrection  (say  S.  Chrysostom 
and  Theophylact).  These  latter  in  the  presence  of  the  Apostles 
only,  the  others  before  all  the  people.  Besides  these  signs  which  I 
have  just  recorded,  others  were  wrought  to  confirm  the  truth  of  the 
resurrection.  And  these  I have  omitted  (says  S.  John)  for  brevity’s 
sake,  and  because  many  of  them  are  recorded  by  the  other 
evangelists.  So  S.  Thomas,  Lyranus,  Cajetan,  Ribera,  Toletus, 
and  others. 

S.  John  seems  here  to  finish  his  Gospel,  as  S.  Augustine  says. 
The  next  chapter  relates  to  the  mysteries  of  the  Church,  and  the 
primacy  of  S.  Peter,  to  show  how  rapidly  the  disciples  multiplied, 
over  whom  S.  Peter  was  placed  as  Vicar.  Jansenius  considers,  most 
improbably,  that  S.  John  added  some  things  here,  which  subsequently 
occurred  to  him.  But  it  would  seem  that  the  Holy  Spirit,  and 
John  too,  added  them  for  an  express  purpose,  and  not  merely 
from  memory. 

Ver.  31. — But  these  are  written , that  ye  may  believe  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ  (the  long-promised  Messiah),  the  Son  of  God:  and  that  believing 
ye  might  have  life  (of  grace  here  and  glory  hereafter)  through  His  name , 
that  is,  through  the  merits  and  satisfaction  of  Christ,  which  are 
applied  to  us  through  the  sacraments  on  our  faith  and  obedience. 
We  must  therefore  believe—  (1.)  That  He  is  the  Saviour  of  the  world. 
(2.)  The  long-expected  Messiah.  (3.)  That  He  is  God  the  Son  of 
God.  (4.)  That  He  will  give  eternal  life  to  those  who  believe  in,  and 
obey  Him.  “ For,”  as  S.  Gregory  says,  “ He  truly  believes,  who  sets 
forth  his  belief  in  his  life.” 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


( 285  ) 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

I  Christ  appearing  again  to  His  disciples , was  known  of  them  by  the  great  draught 
of  fishes . 12  He  dineth  with  them:  15  earnestly  commandeth  Peter  to  feed 

His  lambs  and  sheep:  18  foretelleth  him  of  His  death:  22  rebuketh  his 
curiosity  touching  John.  25  The  conclusion. 

A FTER  these  things  Jesus  shewed  himself  again  to  the  disciples  at  the  sea  of 
Tiberias  ; and  on  this  wise  shewed  he  himself. 

2 There  were  together  Simon  Peter,  and  Thomas  called  Didymus,  and 
Nathanael  of  Cana  in  Galilee,  and  the  sons  of  Zebedee,  and  two  other  of  his 
disciples. 

3 Simon  Peter  saith  unto  them,  I go  a fishing.  They  say  unto  him,  We  also 
go  with  thee.  They  went  forth,  and  entered  into  a ship  immediately ; and  that 
night  they  caught  nothing. 

4 But  when  the  morning  was  now  come,  Jesus  stood  on  the  shore : but  the 
disciples  knew  not  that  it  was  Jesus. 

5 Then  Jesus  saith  unto  them,  Children,  have  ye  any  meat  ? They  answered 
him,  No. 

6 And  he  said  unto  them,  Cast  the  net  on  the  right  side  of  the  ship,  and  ye 
shall  find.  They  cast  therefore,  and  now  they  were  not  able  to  draw  it  for  the 
multitude  of  fishes. 

7 Therefore  that  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved  saith  unto  Peter,  It  is  the  Lord. 
Now  when  Simon  Peter  heard  that  it  was  the  Lord,  he  girt  his  fisher’s  coat  unto 
him  (for  he  was  naked),  and  did  cast  himself  into  the  sea. 

8 And  the  other  disciples  came  in  a little  ship  (for  they  were  not  far  from 
land,  but  as  it  were  two  hundred  cubits),  dragging  the  net  with  fishes. 

9 As  soon  then  as  they  were  come  to  land,  they  saw  a fire  of  coals  there,  and 
fish  laid  thereon,  and  bread. 

10  Jesus  saith  unto  them,  Bring  of  the  fish  which  ye  have  now  caught. 

11  Simon  Peter  went  up,  and  drew  the  net  to  land  full  of  great  fishes,  an 
hundred  and  fifty  and  three  : and  for  all  there  were  so  many,  yet  was  not  the  net 
broken. 

12  Jesus  saith  unto  them,  Come  and  dine.  And  none  of  the  disciples  durst 
ask  him,  Who  art  thou  ? knowing  that  it  was  the  Lord. 

13  Jesus  then  cometh,  and  taketh  bread,  and  giveth  them,  and  fish  likewise. 

14  This  is  now  the  third  time  that  Jesus  shewed  himself  to  his  disciples,  after 
that  he  was  risen  from  the  dead. 

15  IT  So  when  they  had  dined,  Jesus  saith  to  Simon  Peter,  Simon,  son  of 
Jonas,  lovest  thou  me  more  than  these  ? He  saith  unto  him,  Yea,  Lord ; thou 
knowest  that  I love  thee.  He  saith  unto  him,  Feed  my  lambs. 


Digitized  by  V joogle 


286 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XXI. 


16  He  saith  to  him  again  the  second  time,  Simon,  son  of  Jonas,  loveaf.  thou 
lie  ? He  saith  unto  him,  Yea,  Lord  ; thou  knowest  that  I love  thee.  He  saith 
unto  him,  Feed  my  sheep. 

17  He  saith  unto  him  the  third  time,  Simon,  son  of  Jonas,  lovest  thou  me? 
Peter  was  grieved  because  he  said  unto  him  the  third  time,  Lovest  thou  me? 
And  he  said  unto  him,  Lord,  thou  knowest  all  things  ; thou  knowest  that  I love 
thee.  Jesus  saith  unto  him,  Feed  my  sheep. 

18  Verily,  verily,  I say  unto  thee,  When  thou  wast  young,  thou  girdedst  thyself, 
and  walkedst  whither  thou  wouldest  : but  when  thou  shalt  be  old,  thou  shalt 
stretch  forth  thy  hands,  and  another  shall  gird  thee,  and  carry  thee  whither  thou 
wouldest  not. 

19  This  spake  he,  signifying  by  what  death  he  should  glorify  God.  And  when 
he  had  spoken  this,  he  saith  unto  him,  Follow  me. 

20  Then  Peter,  turning  about,  seeth  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved  following  : 
which  also  leaned  on  his  breast  at  supper,  and  said,  Lord,  which  is  he  that  be- 
trayeth  thee  ? 

21  Peter  seeing  him  saith  to  Jesus,  Lord,  and  what  shall  this  man  do  t 

22  Jesus  saith  unto  him,  If  I will  that  he  tarry  till  I come,  what  is  that  to 
thee  ? follow  thou  me. 

23  Then  went  this  saying  abroad  among  the  brethren,  that  that  disciple  should 
not  die  : yet  Jesus  said  not  unto  him,  He  shall  not  die  : but,  If  I will  that  he 
tarry  till  I come,  what  is  that  to  thee  ? 

24  This  is  the  disciple  which  testifieth  of  these  things,  and  wrote  these  things  : 
and  we  know  that  his  testimony  is  true. 

25  And  there  are  also  many  other  things  which  Jesus  did,  the  which,  if  they 
should  be  written  every  one,  I suppose  that  even  the  world  itself  could  not  con- 
tain the  books  that  should  be  written.  Amen. 

Ver.  1. — After  these  things,  &c.  From  this  it  appears  that  Peter 
and  the  other  Apostles  had  gone  from  Judea  into  Galilee,  as  Christ 
had  bidden  them  (S.  Matt  xxiii.  10).  For  this  appearance  of  Christ 
took  place  in  Galilee,  when  He,  being  about  to  go  into  heaven,  in 
order  that  He  might  provide  for  the  government  of  the  faithful, 
appointed  Peter  to  be  the  Head  of  the  Church,  and  His  Vicar  upon 
earth.  This  is  why  S.  John  subjoins  these  things,  and  so  concludes 
his  Gospel. 

Ver.  2. — He  manifested  Himself  thus,  &c.  Christ  wished  a larger 
number,  and  the  more  honourable  of  His  disciples,  to  be  gathered 
together,  in  order  that  His  manifestation  might  be  so  much  the  more 
glorious,  and  that  before  them  as  princes  He  might  declare  Peter  to 
be  His  Vicar  on  earth,  that  so  the  Apostles  and  the  rest  of  the 
faithful  might  acknowledge  him  to  be  such. 

Ver.  3. — Simon  Peter  saith  unto  them,  &c.  Different  writers  give 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


S.  JOHN  AND  THE  PARTRIDGE.  287 

different  reasons  for  this  fishing.  S.  Chrysostom  says,  “Because 
the  Lord  was  not  always  with  them,  neither  had  any  (ministry)  been 
committed  to  them,  they  employed  themselves  in  fishing.”  S. 
Gregory  {Horn.  24.)  says,  “An  employment  which  was  without  sin 
before  their  conversion  was  blameless  after  their  conversion.  There- 
fore Peter  returned  to  his  fishing,  but  Matthew  did  not  return  to  his 
receipt  of  custom.  For  there  are  many  employments  which  it  is 
impossible,  or  scarcely  possible,  to  follow  without  sin.  To  such  a 
man  must  not  return  after  he  is  converted.”  Let  us  add,  that  this 
fishing  took  place  before  Pentecost  and  the  descent  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  by  whom  they  were  bidden  to  preach  the  Gospel.  Wherefore, 
because  the  Apostles  had  nothing  to  occupy  them  at  this  time  in 
the  way  of  preaching,  and  they  were  at  once  poor  and  fishermen, 
they  properly  went  back  to  their  fishing  in  order  to  supply  them- 
selves with  sustenance.  But  after  the  advent  of  the  Holy  Spirit  we 
do  not  read  that  they  employed  themselves  in  fishing,  for  they  were 
wholly  occupied  in  preaching  the  Gospel,  and  in  guiding  the  faithful 
in  the  way  of  all  perfection.  Whilst  the  faithful,  being  studious  of 
evangelical  poverty,  brought  all  their  property  to  the  feet  of  the 
Apostles,  that  they  might  distribute  it  amongst  themselves  and  the 
rest  of  the  believers.  At  any  time,  however,  of  necessity  or  want, 
they  might  lawfully  have  returned  to  their  fishing,  just  as  Paul 
returned  to  his  tent-making  that  he  might  not  be  burdensome  to 
others  for  his  livelihood.  For  this  indeed  is  a matter  of  greater 
perfection,  and  therefore  an  evangelical  counsel,  that  one  should 
preach  the  Gospel  free  of  charge  (to  the  hearers),  and  provide  for 
his  own  sustenance  by  the  labour  of  his  hands.  Lastly,  the  disciples 
went  a-fishing  to  avoid  idleness,  and  as  a relaxation.  Cassian 
relates  the  following  story  concerning  a certain  hunter  who  went  to 
visit  S.  John,  whom  he  found  employed  in  gently  stroking  a part- 
ridge. Being  surprised  at  this  sight,  S.  John  asked  him,  “ What  is 
that  in  your  hand?”  “A  bow,”  he  replied.  “Why  do  you  not 
keep  it  always  bent  ? ” He  answered,  “ It  would  be  inexpedient  to 
do  so,  lest  by  the  continual  curvature  the  strength  of  the  bow  should 
be  destroyed,  and  it  should  come  to  pass  that  when  I am  shooting 


Digitized  by  V joogle 


288 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XXI. 


a strong  arrow  at  some  quarry,  the  stiffness  of  the  bow  being  lost 
through  its  constant  tension,  it  should  not  be  able  to  discharge  a 
powerful  shaft.”  “ In  like  manner,”  replied  the  Blessed  John,  “let 
not  this  brief  relaxation  of  my  mind  offend  you,  O my  young  friend ; 
for  unless  I afforded  some  moderate  relief  to  its  excessive  tension 
it  would  lose  its  vigour,  and  would  not  be  able  to  obey  when  need 
should  call  upon  it  to  make  some  strenuous  effort.” 

Night:  For  night  is  the  most  suitable  time  for  fishing.  For  during 
the  day  the  fish  hide  themselves  in  the  depths  of  the  sea. 

Mystically,  Theophylact  says,  by  night , that  is,  before  the  presence 
of  Christ  the  Sun,  the  prophets  caught  nothing,  because  although 
they  attempted  to  correct  but  a single  nation,  it  was  continually 
falling  into  idolatry. 

They  took  nothing:  because  they  were  fishing  without  Jesus,  that 
they  might  learn  that  all  their  success  in  fishing  for  souls  depended 
wholly  upon  Christ,  and  therefore  that  they  ought  to  seek  for  success 
from  Him,  according  to  the  words  of  the  Psalmist,  “ Except  the  Lord 
build  the  house,  their  labour  is  but  lost  that  build  it.” 

Ver.  4. — When  the  morning  was  come, , &c.  To  show  that  this 
capture  of  fish  was  the  result  of  His  grace,  not  of  their  own  industry. 
For  (naturally)  in  the  morning  fish  flee  away  from  the  light  and  the 
noise  into  the  depths  of  the  sea. 

They  knew  not  Because  He  appeared  to  them  in  another  form, 
as  He  did  to  the  Magdalene  {cap.  xx.  14).  In  sooth  Christ  desired 
to  be  recognised  rather  by  the  miraculous  draught  of  the  fish  than 
by  His  (human)  form ; for  this  was  more  befitting  incarnate  God. 

Mystically:  S.  Gregory  says,  “The  sea  signifies  this  present 
world,  which,  in  the  tumults  of  affairs  and  the  corruptible  waves  of 
life,  dashes  against  itself.  But  the  solidity  of  the  shore  signifies  the 
perpetuity  of  the  everlasting  rest.  The  disciples  therefore  as  yet 
were  engaged  in  the  waves  of  this  mortal  life.  But  the  Lord  was 
now  standing  on  the  shore,  towards  which  Peter,  to  whom  the 
Church  was  specially  committed,  draws  the  fishes,  showing  to  the 
faithful  the  stability  of  eternal  peace.  This  he  did  by  his  preaching 
and  his  epistles.  This  he  does  still  by  daily  signs  and  miracles. 


Digitized  by  V joogle 


THE  END  OF  THE  WORLD. 


289 


Ver.  Jesus  thereforey  &c.  As  though  He  said,  O fishermen, 
have  ye  any  fish  to  sell  Me  ? For  Christ  here  appeared  to  His  disciples 
in  an  unknown  form,  like  a grave  merchantman,  wishing  to  purchase 
fish.  So  S.  Chrysostom.  Wherefore  He  addresses  them  as  boys 
( fiueros ),  as  though  they  were  labourers.  Or  “little  boys”  (*a'sdta), 
addressing  them  as  His  children  out  of  love. 

Any  meat:  Greek  irgo Vulgate pulmentarium,  meaning  any 
food  which  is  eaten  with  bread,  as  we  use  seasoning.  Also  by  this 
word  pulmentarium  Christ  meant  fish.  For,  as  Plutarch  says, 
although  there  are  many  sorts  of  seasoning,  fish  is  especially  so 
called,  because  by  the  nutriment  which  it  affords,  and  the  facility 
with  which  it  can  be  cooked,  it  surpasses  other  kinds.  Also  because 
most  of  the  ancients,  indeed  all  men  before  the  Deluge,  as  I have 
shown  upon  Gen.  ix.,  fed  not  upon  flesh,  but  upon  fish. 

Ver.  6. — He  saith  unto  them , &c.  For  indeed  Jesus  by  His 
hidden  power  had  collected  this  multitude  of  fishes  on  the  right  side 
of  the  boat,  and  so  the  Apostles  who  had  been  fishing  all  night  at 
the  left  side  had  taken  nothing.  From  thence  we  learn,  moraliter^ 
that  we  often  toil  and  labour  in  vain  because  we  fish  at  the  left  side 
without  Jesus,  instead  of  at  the  right  with  Jesus. 

Hearken  now  to  S.  Augustine  (Tract,  122) : “In  the  capture  of  the 
fish  is  set  forth  a sacrament  of  the  Church,  to  wit,  what  shall  be  at 
the  last  resurrection : to  set  forth  which  it  is  signified  that  it  is  as  it 
were  the  end  of  a book,  which  should  be,  as  it  were,  the  proemium 
of  a narrative  which  is  to  follow.  And  the  seven  disciples  by  their 
number  signify  the  end'  of  time.  For  all  time  is  included  in  seven 
days.  The  shore  signifies  the  end  of  the  world,  for  it  is  the  boundary 
of  the  sea.  And  as  the  Church,  such  as  it  shall  be  at  the  end  of 
the  world,  is  here  meant,  so  by  another  fishing  is  signified  the 
Church  such  as  it  is  now.  Therefore  on  that  occasion  Jesus  did 
not  stand  upon  the  shore,  but  went  up  into  the  ship.  Then  the  nets 
were  not  cast  at  the  right  side,  in  order  not  to  denote  the  good  only ; 
nor  yet  at  the  left,  not  to  denote  the  bad  only : but  indifferently  on 
both  sides,  to  signify  that  the  good  were  mingled  with  the  bad.  But 
now  the  net  is  cast  on  the  right  side,  to  signify  the  good  only,  who 

vol.  v.  T 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


290 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XXI. 


are  reserved  for  the  resurrection  of  life.  And  they  will  appear  on 
the  shore,  that  is,  in  the  end  of  the  world  when  they  arise.  For  the 
Church  possesses  them  at  the  end  of  this  life  in  the  sleep  of  peace, 
lying  hid  as  it  were  in  the  deep,  until  the  net  shall  come  to  the 
shore.  And  what  was  signified  in  the  first  fishing  by  the  two  ships 
in  this  place  is  figured  by  the  153,  namely  the  elect  of  the  two  dis- 
pensations, the  circumcision  and  the  uncircumcision.” 

They  cast  therefore , &c.  Behold  the  reward  and  fruit  of  ready 
obedience,  and  that  obedience  to  one  unknown,  and  as  it  seemed,  a 
stranger.  But  Christ  had  inwardly  inclined  their  hearts  to  do  this. 
This  multitude  of  fishes  mystically  represents  the  multitude  of  the 
faithful  which  Peter  and  the  Apostles  afterwards  caught  by  the  net 
of  evangelical  preaching,  and  converted  to  Christ.  So  SS.  Augus- 
tine, Gregory,  Chrysostom,  &c. 

Ver.  7. — Therefore  that  disciple , &c.  You  will  ask,  how  was  it 
that  John  was  the  first  to  recognise  Christ?  Cyril  attributes  it  to 
the  keenness  of  his  intellect  So  does  S.  Chrysostom.  Peter,  he 
says,  was  the  more  fervent,  but  John  had  more  sagacity,  and  there- 
fore was  the  first  to  recognise  Christ.  But  I reply  that  whilst  Peter 
was  occupied  in  drawing  up  the  net  full  of  great  fishes,  John 
more  carefully  looked  at  Jesus,  and  Jesus  first  presented  His 
appearance  to  S.  John,  because  He  most  chiefly  loved  him,  and 
because  he  was  most  pure.  Wherefore  S.  Jerome  rightly  says 
(Epist.  ad  Pammach .),  “First  is  John's  virginity  to  recognise  the 
virgin  form  of  Christ  ‘Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,  for  they 
shall  see  God.'  ” 

Mystically:  the  more  familiar  and  intimate  any  one  is  with  God 
by  prayer,  the  more  does  he  perceive,  penetrate,  contemplate,  and 
admire  God,  and  the  attributes  of  God.  In  fine,  as  John  because 
of  his  virginity  was  dear  to  Christ,  so  also  he  himself  wonderfully 
loves  those  who  are  chaste  and  virgins.  Hear  what  the  Abbot 
Adelred  writes  in  his  life  of  King  Edward  the  Confessor.  “S. 
Edward  never  denied  the  petition  of  any  one  who  asked  in  the  name 
of  S.  John,  for  him  after  the  Prince  of  the  Apostles  he  chiefly  loved. 
Once  it  happened  that  in  the  absence  of  the  chamberlain  a certain 


Digitized  by^ 


STORY  OF  K.  EDWARD  THE  CONFESSOR. 


29I 


foreigner  importunately  asked  the  king  for  alms  in  the  name  of  S. 
John.  So  the  king  gave  him  a precious  ring,  because  he  had  nothing 
else  at  hand.  After  this  it  happened  that  two  Englishmen  went  to 
Jerusalem  to  worship  the  tomb  of  the  Saviour.  One  day  it  came  to 
pass  that  they  missed  the  high  road,  and  were  wandering  out  of  the 
way  when  the  sun  went  down,  and  all  was  dark.  Not  knowing  what 
to  do,  or  whither  to  turn,  a certain  venerable  old  man  appeared  to 
them,  and  led  them  to  the  city.  There  they  were  hospitably  enter- 
tained ; a table  was  spread,  and  their  weary  limbs  were  refreshed  with 
sleep.  When  the  morning  was  come,  as  they  went  out  of  the  city, 
the  old  man  said  to  them,  t My  brethren,  doubt  not  that  you  will 
return  to  your  own  country  in  the  greatest  prosperity,  for  God  will 
make  your  way  prosperous.  And  for  love  of  your  king  I will  keep 
my  eyes  upon  you  in  all  the  way  by  which  ye  go.  I am  John,  the 
Apostle  of  Christ,  who  entertain  the  utmost  love  for  your  king 
because  of  the  merit  of  his  chastity.  Take  back  to  him  this  ring 
which  he  once  gave  me  in  the  habit  of  a pilgrim.  Tell  him  that  the 
day  of  his  departure  draws  nigh.  Within  six  months  I will  visit  him, 
that  with  me  he  may  follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  He  goeth.* 
When  he  had  said  thus  he  disappeared.”  For  this  reason  those  who 
love  virginity  and  purity  are  wont  to  ask  S.  John  to  be  their  patron, 
and  to  invoke  his  aid,  especially  when  they  are  troubled  with 
assaults  of  the  flesh  : and  they  experience  his  help.  To  give  a single 
example  out  of  many : S.  Colette,  a virgin  of  wonderful  austerity 
and  sanctity,  the  reformer  of  the  Order  of  S.  Clare,  that  she  might 
keep  her  virginity  spotless,  chose  S.  John  as  her  patron.  And  not 
in  vain : for  S.  John  appeared  to  her,  and  by  a golden  ring  betrothed 
her  as  a virgin  spouse  to  himself. 

When  Simon  Peter  heard \ &c.,  he  girt,  &c.  Greek  rbv  snsvdurw 
dts^uearo,  he  put  on  his  tunic  over  his  clothes . Whence  it  is  plain  that 
he  was  not  before  wholly  naked,  but  only,  after  the  fashion  of  work- 
men, stripped  of  his  outer  garment. 

And  cast  himself  into  the  sea : either  swimming,  as  Chrysostom 
and  others  think,  or  by  wading  through  the  sea,  as  Bede  and  Mal- 
donatus  say.  For  the  shore  was  near.  Peter  being  the  more  fervent 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


292 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XXI. 


came  to  Christ  njore  promptly  than  the  others.  It  is  improbable 
that  Peter  upon  this  occasion  walked  upon  the  waters.  For  this 
would  have  been  rash,  since  Christ  did  not  now  bid  him  do  it. 

Two  hundred  cubits:  Mystically,  Bede  says,  by  the  200  cubits  is 
expressed  the  twofold  power  of  charity.  For  by  love  of  God  and 
our  neighbour  we  draw  nigh  to  Christ. 

Ver.  10. — As  soon  as  they  were  come  to  land , &c.  Here  was 
another  miracle  of  Christ,  that  He  for  His  disciples  suddenly  coming 
to  Him  cooked  fish,  and  prepared  a dinner.  Cyril  thinks  that  this 
fish  had  been  speedily  drawn  from  the  depths  of  the  sea.  But 
Chrysostom  thinks  that  it  had  been  created  out  of  nothing.  With 
greater  probability,  Leontius  and  others  say  that  Christ  produced 
the  fish,  the  coals,  the  fire,  and  the  bread  out  of  the  atmosphere,  or 
some  other  substance,  as  He  did  the  loaves  when  He  multiplied 
them.  Christ  did  this  to  show  (1.)  that  the  great  draught  of  fishes 
was  His  own  work,  and  that  it  was  He  who  had  collected  all  those 
fishes  at  the  right  side  of  the  ship.  (2.)  That  He  had  no  need  of 
them  for  Himself,  but  had  done  it  for  the  sake  of  His  Apostles. 
Mystically,  saith  Bede,  out  of  S.  Augustine : The  broiled  fish  is 
Christ  in  His  Passion.  He  Himself  deigned  to  lie  hid  in  the  waters 
of  our  human  nature.  He  willed  to  be  taken  with  the  hook  of  a 
death  like  ours.  And  He  who  was  made  a fish  in  His  Humanity, 
became  the  Bread  that  feeds  us  by  His  Divinity. 

Ver.  11  .—Jesus  saith  . . . bring  of  the  fish , &c.  This  He  did 
that  they  all  might  perceive  the  multitude  of  the  fish  and  the  great- 
ness of  the  miracle. 

Mystically,  S.  Augustine  {Tract.  123)  says,  “The  broiled  fish  is 
Christ  in  His  Passion.  He  is  the  Bread  which  came  down  from 
heaven.  With  Him  the  Church  is  incorporated  for  the  attainment 
of  everlasting  bliss,  according  as  it  is  said,  Bring  of  the  fish  which  ye 
have  taken , that  all  we  who  have  this  hope  through  that  seven-fold 
number  of  disciples,  by  which  the  whole  company  of  the  faithful  is 
figured,  might  know  that  we  have  a share  in  so  great  a sacrament, 
and  are  partakers  of  the  same  blessedness.” 

Simon  Peter  went  up , i.e.  into  the  ship,  &c.  Peter  is  mentioned 


Digitized  by 


, A HUNDRED,  FIFTY  AND  THREE.  293 

as  the  leader  of  the  rest  For  he  could  not  have  drawfi  the  net 
laden  with  so  many  great  fishes  (to  land)  by  himself.  Though 
indeed  S.  Gregory  and  Rupertus  think  that  he  did  do  this  alone, 
though  not  by  his  own  strength,  but  by  Divine  assistance.  And 
thereby  Peter’s  Primacy  is  intimated.  For  he  is  the  first  to  call  his 
companions  to  fish.  He  first  came  to  Christ.  He  was  the  first  also 
to  draw  up  the  net,  that  it  might  be  signified  that  all  fishes,  that 
is  to  say,  all  the  faithful,  ought  to  be  drawn  and  ruled  by  Peter. 
John  therefore  was  the  more  beloved,  but  Peter  the  more  honoured 
by  Christ,  and  by  Him  set  over  the  rest  So  subjects  (spiritual) 
are  now  and  again  more  holy  than  their  rulers,  but  rulers  are  more 
exalted,  and  more  eminent  in  authority  than  their  subjects. 

Fishes , an  hundred  and  fifty  and  three : Why  were  there  exactly 
one  hundred  and  fifty-three?  S.  Jerome  gives  (in  Ezek.  xlvii.  9) 
the  literal  reason ; because  there  are  just  that  number  of  different 
kinds  of  fish.  This  is  what  he  says,  “Those  who  have  written 
about  animated  nature  say  that  there  are  an  hundred  and  fifty-three 
kinds  of  fish.  One  of  each  of  these  kinds  was  caught  by  the 
Apostle,  and  more  remained  uncaught.  For  noble  and  ignoble, 
rich  and  poor,  all  sorts  and  conditions  of  men,  are  drawn  out  of  the 
sea  of  this  world  to  salvation.”  You  must,  however,  understand 
the  matter  thus,  that  only  the  chief  genera  of  fishes  are  included  in 
this  number,  for,  speaking  strictly,  there  are  many  more  kinds. 
Therefore  by  this  number,  or  symbol,  Christ  signified  that  all 
nations  were  to  be  gathered  up  into  the  net  of  the  Church, 
whose  head  and  prince  is  Peter,  and  his  successors,  the  Roman 
Pontiffs. 

Symbolically,  Cyril  says  the  number  one  hundred  signifies  the 
fulness  of  the  Gentiles  which  was  about  to  enter  into  the  net  of 
Peter  and  the  Church  : the  fifty  signifies  the  smaller  number  of  the 
Jews,  who  would  be  saved  : the  three  represents  the  mystery  of  the 
Blessed  Trinity,  by  the  faith  and  worship  of  Whom  both  Jews  and 
Gentiles  are  gathered  together  and  saved.  But  S.  Augustine  ( Tract 
122)  says,  “ This  number  is  made  up  of  three  times  fifty  plus  three, 
because  of  the  mystery  of  the  Trinity.  The  fiftieth  was  the  year  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


294  S.  JOHN,  C.  XXL 

Jubilee  in  which  all  the  people  rested  from  all  their  labours.  The 
year  of  Jubilee  represented  the  state  of  Gospel  grace. 

More  particularly  and  plainly  Rupertus  and  Maldonatus  explain 
thus.  By  those  three  numbers  is  signified  the  three-fold  race  of 
men  who  are  saved.  The  hundred  denotes  those  who  are  married, 
for  these  are  the  most  numerous.  The  fifty  denotes  the  widows 
and  the  continent,  for  these  are  fewer  in  number.  The  three 
denotes  virgins,  the  fewest  of  all. 

And  although  there  were  so  many , &c.  Chrysostom  says  that  in 
this  miracle  three  miracles  were  included,  by  which  Christ  proved 
His  resurrection  and  omnipotence.  The  first  was  in  the  taking  of 
the  fish.  The  second,  in  the  production  of  His  own  fish,  the 
bread,  and  the  burning  coals.  The  third,  in  the  integrity  of  the 
net,  which  signifies  the  unity  and  integrity  of  the  Church,  which 
cannot  be  broken,  or  rent  by  any  schism.  For  they  who  make  a 
schism  separate  themselves  ipso  facto  from  the  Church,  and  con- 
sequently leave  the  Church  to  its  own  unity  and  integrity. 

Jesus  saith  unto  them , Come  and  dine . It  is  probable  that  some 
of  the  fish  which  the  Apostles  caught  were  placed  by  Christ's  com- 
mand upon  the  red-hot  coals,  when  He  said,  Bring  of  the  fish  which 
ye  have  now  caught 

Observe  also  that  it  is  probable  that  Christ  upon  this  occasion 
dined  with  His  disciples,  a thing  which  He  had  been  accustomed 
to  do,  in  order  to  confirm  the  truth  of  His  resurrection. 

Anagogically,  S.  Cyril  says,  In  like  manner  after  the  labours  of 
this  life,  by  which  we  fish  souls  for  God,  Christ  will  prepare  a 
heavenly  dinner,  in  which  we  shall  eternally  feast  with  Him  in 
Divine  delights,  according  as  it  is  written,  That  ye  may  eat  and 
drink  at  My  table  in  My  kingdom  (Luke  xxii.  30). 

And  none  of  them  that  sat  at  meat ; Gr.  fiaOriruv,  i.e.  of  His  dis- 
ciples. Whence  Jansen  thinks  we  ought  to  read  disceniium , disciples , 
instead  of  discumhentium , those  who  sat  at  meat:  but  the  Roman 
copies  read  discum .,  which  seems  more  suitable  to  the  context. 

Durst  ask  Him , &c.  Because,  as  Chrysostom  observes  {Horn.  86), 
Christ  was  not,  as  yet,  presenting  Himself  to  them  in  His  own 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


peter  Christ's  vicar. 


29$ 


proper  appearance  and  form,  but  in  one  more  august,  from  which 
they  were  hesitating  whether  it  were  really  Jesus  Himself,  and  were 
wishing  to  ask  Him,  Who  art  Thou  ? Yet  from  His  features,  from 
what  He  did  and  said,  they  recognised  that  it  was  Jesus  Himself, 
so  that  at  length  they  could  no  longer  doubt.  Wherefore,  partly 
from  reverence  for  Christ,  and  partly  from  the  confidence  of  their 
recognition,  they  dared  not  to  ask  Him. 

Less  happily,  S.  Augustine  interprets  the  expression  to  ask  by  to 
doubt . For  these  differ  as  effect  and  cause. 

Ver.  13. — And  Jesus  came  and  took  bread , &c.  That  is,  when  the 
disciples  by  the  command  of  Jesus  had  sat  down  at  the  table,  He 
also  came,  and  sat  down  with  them. 

Ver.  14. — This  is  now  the  third  time , &c.  That  is  to  say,  reckon- 
ing those  appearances  which  took  place  when  several  of  the  Apostles 
were  present,  for  of  such  only  S.  John  here  makes  mention.  For 
of  such  this  was  the  third.  Otherwise,  if  we  enumerate  all  the  othei 
appearances  of  which  the  other  Evangelists  make  mention,  this 
was  the  seventh  in  order,  as  I have  shown  on  Matt,  xxviii.  10, 
where  I have  enumerated  them  all  in  order. 

Ver.  15. — When  therefore  they  had  dined,  Jesus  saith  to  Simon  Peter — 
“ Simo^  son  of  Jonas , lovest  thou  Me  more  than  these  ? ” When  Christ 
was  about  to  go  away  into  heaven,  He  here  appoints  Peter  His  vicar 
upon  earth,  and  creates  him  Chief  Pontiff,  that  the  one  church  might 
be  ruled  by  one  shepherd.  Christ  had  promised  the  same  thing  to 
Peter — Matt.  xvi.  18 — but  in  this  place  He  confers  the  gift,  and 
constitutes  him  prince  and  ruler  of  the  whole  Church,  lest  any  one, 
on  account  of  Peter’s  threefold  denial,  should  say  that  Christ  had 
changed  His  decree  concerning  him.  So  Cyril.  Mystically,  Alcuin 
here  says  the  Hebrew  Simon  means — obedient.  John  is  grace. 
Peter  is  thus  spoken  of  as  obeying  the  grace  of  God;  because, 
indeed,  he  embraces  Him  with  a burning  love — the  effect,  not  of 
human  merit,  but  of  a Divine  gift. 

Lovest  thou  Me  more  than  these  ? First,  because  this  office  of 
feeding  and  ruling  all  the  faithful  which  I design  to  confer  upon 
thee  demands  the  very  greatest  love  of  Christ  and  of  the  faithful. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


S.  JOItN,  C.  XXI. 


ig  6 

“ Love,”  says  S.  Augustine,  “ is  asked,  and  labour  is  commanded, 
because  where  love  is  there  is  no  labour.” 

Secondly,  that  Christ  may  show  how  greatly  He  loved  His  sheep, 
forasmuch  as  He  was  unwilling  to  entrust  them  to  any  but  to  one 
who  loved  Himself,  and  consequently  His  sheep,  with  a supreme 
love.  Thus  S.  Chrysostom,  Horn.  87,  “ That  which  especially  gains 
for  us  the  divine  favour  is  the  care  of  our  neighbour.  Now  the 
Lord,  passing  over  the  others,  speaks  to  Peter  concerning  such 
things,  for  he  was  the  chief  of  the  Apostles,  and  the  mouth  of  the 
disciples,  and  the  head  of  the  college.  Whence  also  He  commits 
to  him  precedence  over  his  brethren,  as  much  as  to  say,  The  life 
which  thou  saidst  thou  wouldst  lay  down  for  Me,  this  give  for  My 
sheep. 

Thirdly,  because  Peter,  a little  before,  had  thrice  denied  Christ, 
and  this  triple  denial  had  been  forgiven  him  on  his  repentance  by 
Christ ; hence  He  rightly  demands  greater  love  from  him  on  whom 
He  had  bestowed  greater  indulgence.  “ For  to  whom  little  is  for- 
given, the  same  loveth  little  Luke  vil  47.  So  Cyril 

Moreover,  Jesus  asks,  though  He  knew  that  Peter  loved  Him 
more  than  they  all,  says  S.  Augustine,  for  although  John  loved 
Jesus  more  tenderly,  yet  Peter  loved  Him  with  a stronger  and  more 
ardent  love,  as  is  plain  from  all  his  deeds  and  words  about  Jesus. 
Thus  parents  love  their  little  children  with  a tender  love,  but  those 
who  are  youths,  or  grown  up,  with  a stronger  and  more  solid  love ; 
whence  also  they  give  greater  gifts  to  them  than  to  the  little  ones. 
Listen  to  S.  Augustine  (Serm.  on  the  Passion) : “ When  the  Lord 
died,  Peter  feared  and  denied ; the  risen  Lord  rekindled  his  love, 
drove  away  his  fear.  He  denied  fearing  to  die — when  the  Lord  had 
risen  again  why  should  he  fear  ? Since  in  Him  he  found  death  had 
died.” 

He  saith  unto  Him , Yea , Lord,  Thou  knowest  that  I love  Thee. 
“ Hence  it  is  plain,”  says  S.  Augustine,  “ ‘ amo*  and  ‘ dfflgo*  here 
signify  the  same  thing,  although  in  Latin  amo  means  more  than 
diligo,  Peter  does  not  dare  to  say,  I love  Thee  more  than  the 
others  do,  but  I love  Thee ; both  because  he  did  not  know  the 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


FEED  MY  LAMBS. 


297 


hearts  of  the  others — secondly,  because  his  fall  had  made  him  more 
modest  and  cautious.  For  he  had  put  himself  before  the  others 
when  he  said,  ‘ Lord,  although  all  should  be  offended  in  Thee,  yet 
will  I never  be  offended/  and  yet  a little  afterwards  he  fell  more 
shamefully  than  the  others,  and  denied  Christ,  which  they  did  not 
He  saith  unto  him , * Feed  My  lambs'  Feed , like  as  a shepherd  feeds 
sheep  by  leading  them  to  pasture,  and  by  feeding  them,  rules  and 
guides  them  that  they  may  not  stray  from  the  flock,  nor  approach 
noxious  pastures,  nor  be  seized  by  the  wolf.  Hence  to  feed  in 
Scripture  signifies  to  rule,  and  kings  are  called  shepherds , because,  if 
they  would  rightly  rule  their  subjects,  they  ought  to  do  what 
shepherds  do  when  they  feed  their  sheep.  Whence — Psalm  xxiiL 
1 — where  the  Vulgate  has  ‘the  Lord  rules  me/  the  Hebrew  is 
1 Adonai  roi / i.e.  the  Lord  is  my  shepherd , or  feedeth  me . Wherefore 
it  goes  on,  ‘ He  maketh  me  to  lie  down  in  green  pastures.’  Thus 
David,  from  a keeper  of  sheep,  was  made  1y  God  a king  of  men — 
to  feed , i.e . to  rule , Jacob  His  servant,  and  Israel  His  inheritance. 
(Ps.  lxxviii.  71.)  Thus  Cyrus  is  called  a shepherd , i.e.  a prince  and 
king  appointed  by  God — Is  xliv.  28 — that  saith  of  Cyrus,  ‘He  is 
my  shepherd.*  And  Ps.  ii.  9,  ‘ Thou  shalt  rule  them  with  a rod  of 
iron.*  Hebrew  Tirem , i.e.  thou  shalt  feed  them.  And  generally 
speaking,  the  Hebrew  raa,  the  Greek  cro/>a/vw,  and  the  Latin  pasco, 
signify  * to  rule / as  may  be  seen  from  Mic.  v.  2 \ Act.  xx.  28 ; Rev. 
ii.  7,  and  xii.  5,  xix.  15.  Thus  Homer  calls  the  Grecian  king 
Agamemnon  mititm  — i.e.  a shepherd  of  the  people.” 

My  lambs.  Christ,  as  the  first  Shepherd  of  the  sheep,  calls  here 
His  faithful  people  at  one  time  sheep,  at  another,  more  tenderly, 
lambs.  And  that — Firstly,  because  of  the  newness  of  their  life,  for 
being  regenerate  by  Baptism  they  are  made  as  it  were  young  lambs 
of  God.  Secondly,  because  of  their  lamblike  innocence,  which  by 
baptism  they  have  obtained,  and  also  on  account  of  their  following 
Christ,  who  was  called  by  John  the  Baptist,  “ the  Lamb  of  God  who 
taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world.”  Therefore  the  word  sheep 
signifies  that  Christ  is  the  Shepherd  of  Christians  ; the  word — lambs 
— signifies  that  Christ  is  their  Father,  yea  indeed  their  Mother, 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


298 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XXI. 


forasmuch  as  they  are  those  whom  He  hath  by  baptism  begotten 
unto  God,  and  adopted  as  His  own  children.  Jansen  says  lambs 
and  sheeps  are  the  same.  Whence  the  ^Ethiopic  version,  instead  of 
lambs ) has  sheeps  repeating  sheep  thrice.  Theophylact  adds  that  they 
are  called  lambs  in  order  that  the  very  name  might  indicate  those 
recently  converted,  and  who  were  tenderer  in  the  faith,  of  whom 
there  was  about  to  be  a great  multitude,  when  the  Apostles  began  to 
preach.  And  because  these  would  require  greater  care,  and  must  be 
brought  up  and  nourished  with  greater  labour,  therefore  the  Lord 
saith  twice  (according  to  the  Vulgate),  “ feed  My  lambs,”  that  by 
this  repetition  He  might  show  that  He  wished  Peter  to  bestow  the 
very  greatest  care  upon  them  : but  those  who  were  stronger  in  the 
faith  He  calls  sheep . Again,  by  lambs  He  understands  simple,  faith- 
ful souls;  by  sheep — teachers,  pastors,  bishops,  and  apostles,  who 
are,  as  it  were,  mothers  of  the  faithful.  Thus  Bellarmine. 

From  this  place  then  it  is  plain  that  S.  Peter  and  his  successor, 
the  Roman  Pontiff,  is  the  head  and  prince  of  the  Church,  and  that 
all  the  faithful,  even  bishops,  patriarchs,  and  apostles,  are  subject  to 
him,  and  ought  by  him  to  be  fed  and  ruled.  We  gather  this,  first 
because  Christ  here  interrogates  Peter  only,  and  this  thrice,  as  the 
chief  and  mouth  of  the  Apostles.  So  SS.  Chrysostom,  Theophylact, 
Euthymius.  Moreover  Christ  here  tacitly  signifies  that  Peter  loved 
Him  more  than  the  other  Apostles,  and  therefore  that  he  was  worthy 
to  succeed  Him  in  the  love  and  care  of  the  flock — that  is,  of  the 
Church  and  the  faithful.  For  that  power  which  is  not  founded 
upon  love  comes  to  naught. 

Secondly — this  is  plain  from  the  word  feed , i.e.  rule t as  I have 
shown,  and  from  the  terms  lambs  and  sheepy  for  by  these  words 
Christ  signifies  all  the  members  of  the  Church  as  it  were  subject  to 
Himself,  the  chief  Shepherd,  for  He  excepts  no  one.  They  there- 
fore who  are  the  sheep  of  Christ,  are  likewise  the  sheep  of  Peter, 
for  Christ  here  commits  them  to  him,  to  be  fed  and  ruled.  They 
therefore  who  are  not  Peter’s  sheep — namely,  heretics — neither  are 
they  the  sheep  of  Christ.  So  all  the  other  Apostles,  forasmuch  as 
they  were  Christ’s  sheep,  so  likewise  are  they  also  Peter’s  sheep. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


S.  PETER  THE  CHIEF  SHEPHERD. 


299 


From  whence  it  was  Peter’s  right  to  direct  them,  to  compose  their 
differences,  and  to  govern  them  in  all  things.  For  Christ  instituted 
the  most  excellent  government  in  His  Church,  that  is  the  monarchic, 
both  that  there  might  be  one  Church,  and  that  occasions  of  schism 
might  be  cut  off,  as  S.  Cyprian  teaches  in  his  book  on  the  unity  of 
the  Church.  “ The  primacy,”  he  says,  “ is  given  to  Peter,  to  show 
that  there  is  one  Church  of  Christ  and  one  chief  See;”  and  S. 
Jerome  says,  “ Among  twelve,  one  is  chosen,  that  unity  might  be 
preserved.”  Hear  also  S.  Leontius  (Ser.  3,  de  Assum.) : “ From 
the  whole  world,  one  Peter  is  chosen,  who  is  set  over  the  Church, 
called  out  of  all  nations,  and  over  all  the  Apostles,  and  all  the 
Fathers  of  the  Church,  that  although  there  be  in  the  people  of  God 
many  priests  and  many  pastors,  still  Peter  may  rightly  rule  all  whom 
Christ  also  rules  in  the  chief  place.  A great  and  wonderful  associa- 
tion in  His  own  power,  beloved  brethren,  the  Divine  condescension 
gave  to  this  man,  and  if  He  wished  that  anything  should  be  common 
with  him  to  the  other  princes  of  the  church,  He  only  gave  through 
him  that  which  He  denied  not  to  the  rest.” 

Hear  likewise  S.  Bernard  (Z.  3,  de  Consid.  to  Pope  Eugen  : towards 
the  end) : “ They,”  i.e.  bishops,  “ have  each  their  own  flocks 
assigned  to  them,  to  thee  all  have  been  entrusted, — one  shepherd 
for  one  flock ; nor  art  thou  only  the  one  shepherd  of  all  the  sheep, 
but  of  all  the  shepherds.  Do  you  ask  how  I prove  this  ? — from  the 
word  of  the  Lord  : for  to  whom  were  absolutely  and  without 
distinction  all  the  sheep — I say  not  merely  of  Bishops,  but  of 
Apostles,  committed?  ‘If  thou  lovest  Me,  O Peter,  feed  My 
sheep ; 9 which  ? — the  people  of  this  or  that  city  or  region  or  king- 
dom ? ‘ My  sheep}  He  saith : to  what  man  is  it  not  plain  that  He 

did  not  indicate  some  only,  but  assigned  all?  Nothing  is  excepted 
where  no  distinction  is  made ; ” and  ( III  Cap . Solit.  De  Major . et 
Obed .)  he  says,  “ Now  to  us  the  sheep  of  Christ  were  committed 
through  Blessed  Peter,  as  the  Lord  saith,  ‘ Feed  my  sheep,*  making 
no  distinction  between  these  sheep  and  others,  that  He  might  show 
that  that  sheep-fold  which  did  not  recognise  Peter  and  his  successors 
as  pastors  and  masters,  did  not  belong  to  Him.”  See  what  has 


Digitized  by 


Google 


3oo 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XXI. 


been  said  on  S.  Matt.  xvi. ; see  also  Bellarmine,  who  teaches  that 
Christ,  by  this  precept  which  He  gave  to  Peter,  saying,  “ Feed  My 
sheep,”  at  the  same  time  founded  the  Popedom  as  the  Ecclesiastical 
Head,  and  gave  it  to  S.  Peter  and  his  successors  the  Bishops  of 
Rome.  In  chap.  xiv.  de  Pont.,  he  proves  that  these  words  were 
spoken  by  Christ  to  Peter  only.  In  chap.  xv.  he  proves  that  the 
word  —feed — signifies  government  and  power  of  ruling . In  chap.  xvi. 
that  sheep  signify  all  the  faithful,  even  the  Apostles,  and  the  whole 
Church  : all  which  things  Calvin;  Luther,  and  the  heretics  deny. 

From  this  passage  theologians  generally,  and  especially  Suarez  on 
Indulgences , show  that  the  power  of  granting  Indulgences  was  given 
by  Christ  to  Peter  and  the  Pontiffs  who  succeed  him.  For  under 
that  word— feed — is  included  every  act  of  jurisdiction  which  may 
pertain  to  shutting  or  opening  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  that  so  the 
gift  may  be  equal  to  the  promise ; but  the  remission  of  penalties  by 
means  of  Indulgences  is  one  of  the  acts  by  which  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  is  opened;  it  therefore  is  also  comprehended  under  the 
general  charge  of  feeding  the  sheep  of  Christ. 

Ver.  1 6. — He  saith  to  him  the  second  time,  Simon,  son  of  fonas,  lovest 
thou  Me  f He  saith  unto  Him,  Yea,  Lord,  Thou  knowest  that  1 love 
Thee.  Hear  S.  Chrysostom : “ Again  he  dreads  the  former  things, 
lest  perchance,  thinking  himself  to  love,  he  should  be  corrected  if 
he  did  not  love,  like  as  before  he  was  corrected  for  thinking  himself 
strong,  and  therefore  he  takes  refuge  in  Christ  Himself.” 

He  saith  unto  him  the  second  time,  Feed  My  lambs . Thus  the 

Arabic  has  it.  But  the  Greek  and  Syriac  instead  of  lambs  have 
sheep , but  it  is  very  probable  that  the  Vulgate,  together  with  the 
Arabic,  read  the  Greek  ngoparioi  inserting  iota,  i.e.  little  sheep,  or 
lambs:  because  the  shepherd’s  chief  care  must  be  for  them;  and 
therefore  Christ  repeats  and  doubles  His  injunction  concerning  them. 

As  S.  Augustine  says,  “ Let  it  be  love’s  office  to  feed  the  Lord’s 
flock,  like  as  it  was  the  mark  of  fear  to  deny  the  Shepherd.” 
Hence  S.  Gregory  (i  Part . Pastor,  c . v.)  says,  “He  who  is  strong 
in  virtue  and  refuses  to  feed  the  flock  of  God  is  proved  not  to  love 
his  Pastor.” 


Di  d by  Go 


FEED  MY  SHEEP. 


301 


Ver.  1 7. — He  saith  unto  him  the  third  time , Simon , son  of  Jonas,  lovest 
Thou  Me  f Peter  was  grieved  because  He  said  unto  him  the  third  time 
lovest  thou  Me,  and  he  said  unto  Him,  Lord , Thou  knowest  all  things  ; 
Thou  knowest  that  1 love  Thee , He  saith  unto  him.  Feed  My  sheep 
(Syriac,  My  lambs).  Why  does  Christ  thrice  ask  Peter  if  he 
loved  Him,  and  thrice  repeat,  Feed  My  sheep  l I answer,  the  first 
reason  is,  that  Peter,  by  a triple  and  constant  profession  of  his 
singular  love,  might  expiate  and  change  his  three-fold  denial  of 
Christ.  So  Cyril,  Leontius,  Theophylact,  Bede,  and  S.  Augustine, 
which  last  thus  writes  (Tract.  123):  “For  a threefold  denial  a 
threefold  confession  is  rendered,  that  the  tongue  might  not  seem  to 
serve  love  less  than  fear,  and  that  impending  death  might  not  seem 
to  elicit  more  speech  than  Present  Life.  Let  it  be  the  office  of  love 
to  feed  the  Lord’s  flock,  if  it  was  the  mark  of  fear  to  deny  the 
Shepherd.  If  any  feed  Christ’s  sheep  with  this  disposition,  that 
they  wish  them  to  be  their  own  sheep  rather  than  His,  they  are 
proved  to  love  not  Christ  but  themselves,  either  from  the  desire  of 
boasting,  or  ruling,  or  acquiring,  not  from  the  love  of  obeying,  and 
helping,  and  pleasing  God.  Against  such,  therefore,  the  Word  of 
Christ,  many  times  enjoined,  gives  warning,  and  of  them  the  Apostle 
complains  that  they  seek  their  own,  not  the  things  which  be  of 
Jesus  Christ.  For  to  say,  ‘If  thou  lovest  Me,  feed  My  sheep,’  what 
else  is  it  but  to  say,  If  thou  lovest  Me,  do  not  study  to  feed  thyself, 
but  My  sheep ; feed  them  as  Mine,  not  as  thine : seek  My  glory  in 
them,  not  thine : My  dominion,  not  thine  own  ? ” From  hence  let 
bishops  learn  to  examine  suspended  priests  and  others  a second  and 
third  time,  concerning  their  amendment,  that  they  may  be  safe  in 
restoring  them  to  their  office. 

The  second  cause  is  that  Christ  might  show  what  a value  He  set 
upon  His  sheep,  and  how  in  the  day  of  judgment  He  will  examine 
bishops  and  pastors  as  to  their  care  for,  but  especially  as  to  their 
love  for,  the  sheep.  Wherefore  S.  Bernard  (Ser.  18  in  Cant.) 
inveighs  against*  those  who,  though  having  little  love,  are  ambitious 
of  being  set  over  others,  and  so  lose  themselves  and  others ; or  if 
they  save  those  under  them,  lose  themselves.  “ Thou,  brother,”  he 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


302 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XXI. 


says,  “ whose  salvation  is  not  yet  strong,  who  as  yet  hast  not  love, 
or  that  so  weak  and  like  a reed  as  to  yield  to  every  blast,  believe 
every  spirit,  be  carried  about  with  every  wind  of  doctrine,  thou,  I 
say,  who  hast  such  an  opinion  of  thine  own  self  in  what  pertains  to 
thine  own  self,  by  what  madness,  I ask,  art  thou  ambitious  to  have 
the  care  of  others,  or  even  acquiesce  in  having  it  ? ” 

Thirdly — that  He  may  show  that  pastors  ought  to  feed  their 
sheep,  as  it  were,  in  a threefold  manner — viz.,  by  the  word  of  truth, 
by  example  of  life,  and  by  temporal  assistance  (see  S.  Greg.)  And 
S.  Bernard  (Ser.  2 on  the  Resurr.)  says,  that  feed  was  repeated  by 
Christ  thrice,  in  order  that  a pastor  may  feed  his  sheep  by  mind, 
by  tongue,  and  by  hand.  “ Feed?  he  says,  “ by  mind,  feed  by 
mouth,  feed  by  works.  Feed  by  mental  prayer,  by  verbal  exhorta- 
tion, by  showing  example.”  The  same  (Ep.  201)  says,  " Feed  by 
word yfeed  by  example,  feed  by  the  fruit  of  holy  prayers.”  Hence 
that  wonderful  love  and  zeal  for  souls  in  S.  Peter,  as  well  as  in 
S.  John,  who  in  his  Gospel,  and  his  Epistles,  everywhere  breathes 
love  and  Divine  fire.  A memorable  instance  of  this  was  that 
young  man  who  had  been  converted  by  S.  John  and  committed 
to  a certain  bishop  by  whom  he  had  been  neglected,  and  so  had 
become  a chief  of  robbers,  whom  S.  John,  when  an  old  man,  brought 
back  to  repentance  and  a holy  life.  Eusebius  (L.  3,  Hist.  c.  23) 
gives  a full  account  of  this  matter  from  Clemens  Alexandrinus. 
Also  S.  Chrysostom  (Ep.  5,  to  Theodorus , a lapsed  person). 

Peter  was  grieved — because  from  the  thrice-repeated  question 
it  seemed  to  him  as  if  his  love  for  Christ  were  suspected,  or  verily 
he  was  afraid  that  he  had  no  part  in  the  Passion ; and  like  as  he 
then  denied,  so  now  also  he  did  not  love  Christ.  So  S.  Chrysostom, 
&c.  Whence  the  Lord  consoles  him  in  his  grief,  and  says  that 
Peter,  from  the  love  and  example  of  Christ,  should,  like  a true 
shepherd,  be  crucified  for  the  sheep. 

Feed  My  sheeps  as  Mine,  not  as  thine ; seek  My  glory  in  them, 
not  thine  ; My  profit,  not  thine.  Hear  S.  Augustine : “ Let  us 
not  therefore  love  ourselves  but  Him,  and  in  feeding  His  sheep 
let  us  seek  the  things  of  Christ,  not  our  own  : he  who  loves  him- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EXAMPLE  OF  S.  PAUL. 


303 


self,  not  God,  does  not  really  love  himself ; for  he  who  is  not  able 
to  live  by  himself,  dies  by  loving  himself : when  He  is  loved  from 
whom  is  life,  by  not  loving  himself  a man  the  more  loves  himself, 
forasmuch  as  he  loveth  not  himself  in  order  that  he  may  love  Him 
by  whom  he  liveth.”  Such  a shepherd  was  S.  Paul,  the  colleague 
of  S.  Peter,  who  said,  “ for  I could  wish  that  myself  were  accursed 
from  Christ  for  my  brethren,  my  kinsmen,  according  to  the  flesh” 
(Rom.  ix.  3).  Where  S.  Chrysostom  says,  “ Broader  than  any 
sea,  more  vehement  than  any  flame  was  this  love,  and  no  speech 
can  worthily  express  it”  In  the  first  place,  this  I myself  is  em- 
phatic. What  does  this  I myself  mean  ? Says  S.  Chrysostom, 
‘ It  is  I who  have  been  made  a teacher  of  all,  I who  have  collected^ 
offices  and  merits  infinite,  I who  expect  infinite  crowns.”  And  then 
some  remarks  intervening,  he  thus  explains  S.  Paul’s  wish  of 
anathema : “ Willingly  would  I lose  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and 
be  cut  off  from  the  hidden  glory,  considering  that  it  would  afford 
me  the  highest  consolation  if  only  I might  no  more  hear  Him 
reviled,  with  love  of  Whom  I so  greatly  burn.” 

Ver.  18. — Verily,  verily,  I say  unto  thee,  when  thou  wast  young, 
&c.,  whither  thou  wouldst  not,  i.e.  by  thy  natural  will  of  sense,  or 
feeling.  For  by  the  rational  will  Peter  desired  this  above  all  things. 
S.  Chrysostom  says,  Christ  predicts  his  martyrdom,  showing  him  in 
what  way  and  how  much  he  ought  to  love  Christ  and  His  sheep, 
even  unto  His  cross. 

When  thou  wast  young:  by  this  is  shown,  says  S.  Chrysostom, 
that  Peter  was  neither  a young,  nor  an  old,  but  a perfect  man. 
For  such  a one  it  behoved  the  Pontiff  and  prince  of  the  Apostles 
to  be,  that  his  age  might  win  him  authority,  and  yet  be  apt  and 
strong  for  apostolic  labours. 

The  meaning  is,  When  thou  wast  young,  and  hadst  bodily  strength, 
thou  wast  free,  and  didst  rise  from  thy  couch,  and  clothedst 
thyself,  and  walkedst  at  thine  own  pleasure  whither  thou 
wouldest;  but  when  thou  shalt  be  old,  at  the  time  when  men 
seek  rest  and  ease,  thou  shalt  by  no  means  rest,  but  shalt  have 
harder  labours.  For  they  shall  bind  thee,  and  bring  thee  to 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


304  s.  JOHN,  C.  XXI. 

the  cross,  where  thou  shalt  stretch  forth  thy  hands,  t.e.  shalt  be 
crucified. 

Less  correctly,  therefore,  Lyra  explains  shall  gird  thee  to  mean, 
Another  shall  bind  thee  with  cords,  not  nail  thee,  to  the  cross.  For 
the  words,  shall  gird , refer  not  to  the  cross,  but,  as  the  Arabic  and 
Syriac  translate,  to  the  loins  of  Peter,  and  to  his  hands  and  feet. 
Another , i.e.  a lictor  or  a hangman,  shall  bind  thy  loins  and  thine 
arms,  and  carry  thee  as  a criminal  to  the  cross.  Besides,  S.  Peter 
was  not  fastened  to  the  cross  with  cords  but  with  nails,  as  S.  Chry- 
sostom says  expressly  (Horn,  in  Princ.  Apost.),  “Rejoice,  O Peter, 
who  hast  enjoyed  the  wood  of  the  cross,  and  who  wouldst  not 
be  crucified  upright  after  the  example  of  thy  Master,  but  with  thy 
head  downwards,  as  it  were  ready  for  thy  journey  from  earth  to 
heaven.  O blessed  nails,  which  passed  through  those  most  holy 
limbs.” 

Admirably  says  S.  Augustine,  “ That  denier  and  lover,  puffed  up 
by  presumption,  cast  down  by  denial,  purified  by  tears,  approved  by 
confession,  crowned  by  enduring,  found  such  an  end,  that  he  died 
for  perfect  love  of  Christ’s  name,  with  Whom  in  his  perverse  precipi* 
tance  he  had  promised  to  die.  Made  strong  by  His  resurrection,  he 
does  what  in  his  weakness  he  had  rashly  promised.  And  now  he 
fears  not  the  destruction  of  this  life,  because  the  Lord  having  arisen, 
had  shown  him  the  pattern  of  another  life.” 

Ver.  19. — This  He  spake,  signifying } &c.  Peter  therefore  by  his 
death  upon  the  cross  glorified  God,  and  so  his  death  was  not  shame- 
ful, as  Nero  and  the  Romans  thought,  but  was  for  the  honour  and 
glory  both  of  God  and  Peter.  The  first  reason  was  because  Peter 
was  crucified  for  the  truth  of  the  Faith.  And  this  was  glorious. 

2.  He  glorified  God,  because  for  God  and  His  Son  Jesus  Christ, 
whom  he  preached,  he  suffered  crucifixion.  But  what  is  more 
glorious  than  to  die  for  God  ? 

3.  Because  in  the  death  of  the  cross,  he  was  like  Christ,  so  that  as 
he  was  like  Him  in  his  life  and  pontificate,  he  might  also  be  like 
Him  in  his  cross  and  death.  As  S.  Chrysostom  observes,  Christ 
does  not  say,  thou  shalt  die,  but  thou  shalt  glorify , because  to  suffer 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  HONOUR  OF  THE  CROSS. 


305 


for  Christ  is  honour  and  glory.  Hence  the  martyrdom  of  the  cross 
is  more  honourable  than  other  kinds  of  martyrdom,  for  which  reason 
it  was  desired  by  many  who  were  crucified.  S.  Maximus  (. Serm . 1, 
de  Natal . A post.)  says,  “Such  was  Peter,  who  when  as  a disciple  of 
Christ  he  was  brought  to  the  cross,  asked  that  he  might  be  crucified 
upside  down.  He  feared  not  the  suffering,  but  he  shrunk  from 
equality  with  the  Lord’s  cross,  manifesting  unto  ail  men  the  power 
of  his  marvellous  humility,  and  preserving  amidst  his  torments  the 
discipline  of  the  mystery  (of  the  cross).” 

4.  Because  Peter,  dying  upon  the  cross  for  Christ,  has  from  Him 
obtained  great  glory,  as  well  in  heaven  as  upon  earth  where  he 
glorified  God,  who  was,  as  it  were,  the  origin  and  author  of  his  glory. 
Hence  the  faithful  throughout  the  world,  even  kings  and  princes, 
flock  to  Rome,  that  they  may  visit  and  venerate  the  place  of  Peters 
crucifixion  and  burial,  and  his  basilica  in  the  Vatican,  which  is  the 
wonder  of  the  world.  As  S.  Augustine  says  (Serm.  28,  de  Sand .), 
“Now  at  the  memory  of  the  Fisherman  the  emperor  bends  his 
knees;  there  sparkle  the  gems  of  his  diadem,  where  shine  the 
benefits  of  the  Fisherman.”  And  S.  Chrysostom  says,  “ Even  kings 
and  governors,  leaving  all  things,  run  to  the  sepulchres  of  the  Fisher- 
man and  the  Tent-maker.  And  at  Constantinople  our  princes  deem 
it  a great  favour  if  their  bodies  may  be  buried,  not  near  the  Apostles, 
but  outside  the  porches  (of  their  churches).  And  kings  become  the 
doorkeepers  of  fishermen. 

Morally,  learn  from  hence  to  glory  with  SS.  Peter  and  Paul  in  the 
cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  to  congratulate  thyself  when 
Christ  makes  thee  a partaker  of  it,  and  sends  thee  some  little  portion 
of  His  cross,  whether  by  sickness,  or  persecution,  or  reproach,  01 
by  any  other  affliction.  For  by  no  other  thing  is  God  more  glorified 
than  by  martyrdom  and  the  cross,  if  they  be  borne  patiently  and 
joyfully.  The  cross  therefore  is  the  honour  and  glory  of  Christ  and 
Christians,  not  their  shame  and  disgrace. 

And  when  He  had  thus  said , &c.  Observe,  with  Cyril,  Chrysostom, 
Maldonatus,  and  others,  that  Christ  here  by  His  action  signified  to 

Peter  the  same  thing  which  He  had  spoken  in  word.  He  therefore 

VOL.  v.  u 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


306 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XXI. 


rising,  and  going  from  the  place  to  the  dinner,  invites  Peter  to  follow 
Him,  going  before  him  on  foot,  and  to  signify  that  he  was  to  follow 
Him  as  his  lawfully  appointed  Vicar,  in  those  things  which  He  had 
already  said  to  him,  namely,  in  the  pastoral  care  of  His  sheep,  and 
the  punishment  of  the  cross.  Therefore  He  saith  to  him,  Follow 
Mo,  (i.)  As  in  going,  so  also  by  succeeding  Me  in  the  government 
of  the  Church.  Be  thou  therefore  My  successor  as  the  Pastor  and 
Ruler  of  My  whole  Church. 

2.  Follow  Me,  that  as  I have  gone  before  thee  to  the  cross,  so  do 
thou  follow  Me  to  the  same.  And  let  not  the  cross  seem  to  thee 
too  hard  to  undergo  for  Me,  for  I first  endured  it  for  thee.  For 
thee  and  for  the  rest  of  the  faithful  I went  before  to  it,  and  smoothed 
the  way.  For  it  behoves  thee  to  follow  Me,  as  well  in  thy  life  and 
pastoral  office,  as  in  death  and  the  cross,  that  thou  shouldest  lay  down 
thy  life  for  the  sheep,  and  be  a guide  to  the  rest  of  the  faithful  to 
the  cross  and  martyrdom.  Whence  the  Gloss  says,  “ if  the  Shepherd 
has  been  sacrificed  as  a sheep,  let  not  those  who  from  sheep  have 
become  shepherds  fear  to  be  sacrificed.”  Hence  when  Peter  was 
shut  up  in  the  Maraertine  prison  at  Rome,  the  Christians  were  per- 
suading him,  and  by  their  entreaties  almost  compelling  him,  to  flee. 
To  please  them  he  did  so.  But  outside  the  gate,  which  is  now 
called  the  gate  of  S.  Sebastian,  Christ  met  him.  Peter  asked  Him, 
Lord,  whither  goest  Thou  ? The  Lord  answered  him,  I am  going  to 
Rome  to  be  crucified  a second  time.  Peter  understood  that  Christ 
willed  to  be  crucified,  not  in  His  own  person,  but  in  the  person  of 
Peter,  His  Vicar.  Therefore  he  immediately  returned  to  prison, 
and  shortly  afterwards  underwent  the  death  of  the  cross.  The  place 
where  Christ  thus  met  and  conversed  with  Peter  is  still  to  be  seen 
just  outside  Rome.  It  is  adorned  with  a chapel,  and  is  religiously 
visited,  and  is  commonly  known  as  Domine,  quo  vadis  ? 

3.  Follow  Me,  in  the  pastoral  care,  that  thou  mayest  feed  the 
faithful  both  by  word  and  example,  and  especially  by  super-abound- 
ing charity. 

Listen  to  Theophylact : in  that  He  saith,  Follow  Me,  He  made 
him  the  Prelate  of  all  the  faithful.  Lastly,  He  manifested  His  affec- 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


Peter’s  humility.  307 

tion  towards  him.  For  we  wish  those  who  are  more  strictly  bound 
to  us  to  follow  us. 

Admirably  saith  S.  Irenaeus,  “ To  follow  the  Saviour  is  to  partake 
of  salvation  : to  follow  the  light  is  to  partake  of  light : now  they 
who  are  in  the  light  do  not  themselves  illuminate  the  light,  but  are 
enlightened  by  it” 

Vers.  20,  21. — Peter,  turning,  saw  that  disciple , &c.  Peter,  in 
obedience  to  Christ,  was  beginning  to  follow  Him, — presently  John 
also,  and  the  rest  of  his  companions  followed.  Peter  then,  being 
anxious  about  John  and  his  companions,  turned  and  looked  back. 
Seeing  them  following,  he  omitted  mention  of  the  rest,  and  asked 
Christ  what  was  to  become  of  John,  whether,  namely,  John  was  to 
follow  Christ  in  the  same  way  as  himself,  and  to  die  upon  a cross. 
Peter  asked  this,  both  because  he  loved  John  above  the  rest,  and  also 
because  he  knew  that  Christ  loved  him  above  the  rest,  and  that  he 
had  reclined  upon  His  breast  at  supper.  He  wondered  that  Christ 
should  pass  over  this  very  dearly  beloved  John ; and  so  he  calls  him 
to  His  remembrance.  As  though  he  said,  “ What  will  be  the  fate 
of  Thy  well-beloved  John  ? Surely,  as  Thou  didst  prefer  him  to  me 
at  the  supper,  Thou  mightest  now  rightly  prefer  him  in  the  pastoral 
office,  and  subject  me  to  him  as  a pastor.  But  since  it  has  seemed 
good  to  Thee  to  do  otherwise,  at  least  I would  desire  to  know  what 
is  to  be  the  history  of  his  life  and  death.”  Finally,  the  question  was 
asked,  because  Peter  here  pays  back,  as  it  were,  to  John,  the  ques- 
tion which  John  at  his  instigation  had  asked  at  the  last  supper, 
when  he  asked  Jesus  who  should  betray  Him  ? Peter  asked  Jesus 
concerning  John,  thinking  that  John  desired  to  know  what  was  to 
be  his  future  lot,  and  yet  did  not  dare  to  ask  Christ.  Listen  to  S. 
Chrysostom.  “ Because  the  Lord  had  foretold  him  great  things,  and 
had  committed  the  whole  world  to  him,  and  prophesied  his  martyr- 
dom, and  testified  larger  love,  desiring  also  to  receive  John  as  his 
partner,  he  said,  But  this  tnan,  what  (of  him  ?)  For  Peter  dearly 
loved  John,  and  thinking  that  he  wished  to  ask  a question  concern- 
ing himself,  but  did  not  dare,  he  undertook  to  ask  for  him.” 

From  hence  let  prelates  learn  not  to  follow  their  own  affections,  nor 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


308 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XXI. 


indulge  their  love,  but  to  follow  reason  in  all  things,  and  to  appoint 
such  pastors  only  as  they  deem  most  meet  for  the  pastoral  office. 
Even  so  here  Christ  did  not  appoint  John,  although  he  was  His 
most  dearly  beloved  kinsman,  to  be  His  Vicar,  and  successor,  and 
the  Pontiff  of  the  Church,  but  Peter. 

Ver.  22 .—Jesus  saith  unto  hint , So  I will  him  to  tarry  till  I come, 
what  to  thee  ? There  is  a threefold  reading  here.  The  first,  the 
Greek,  and  from  it  the  Syriac,  Arabic  and  Ethiopic  versions,  If  1 
will  him  to  tarry . The  second  is,  S.  Jerome's  {lib.  2,  cant  Joviti) 
and  others,  If  so . The  third  is  the  Latin,  and  especially  the 
Roman,  codices,  So  I will  him  to  tarry . This  is  the  reading  of  S* 
Augustine,  Bede,  Rupert,  the  Gloss,  S.  Thomas,  Lyra,  and  others. 
George  Trapezuntius  endeavours,  although  a Greek,  to  defend  this 
reading  by  many  arguments.  Cardinal  Bessarion  refutes  him,  and 
defends  the  first  reading.  It  is  in  favour  of  the  first  reading  that 
the  Latin  si  is  easily  changed  into  sic . But  the  Greek  iav  could  not 
easily  be  transformed  into  ourus.  Again,  the  first  reading  gives  a 
plain  sense  : thus,  “ If  I will  that  John  should  remain  in  life,  and  not 
be  crucified  as  I will  thee  to  be,  what  is  it  to  thee  ? Follow  Me,  and 
leave  John  to  My  care.”  For  Christ  wishes  only  to  repress  Peter's 
curiosity,  that,  intent  upon  himself  alone,  he  should  leave  the  care 
of  John  to  Christ.  So  S.  Cyril,  &c. 

The  arguments  in  favour  of  the  third  reading  are,  1.  That  the 
Roman  edition,  corrected  by  order  of  the  Pope,  as  well  as  many 
MSS.  and  Latin  interpreters,  have  it.  2.  That  according  to  it  Christ 
gives  more  satisfaction  to  Peter's  question.  3.  That  from  it 
the  disciples  would  more  readily  take  up  the  opinion  about  John, 
that  he  was  not  to  die.  4.  Because  Trapezuntius,  who  was  an  excel- 
lent Greek  scholar,  shows  that  the  Greek  particle  iav  and  the  Latin 
si  have  this  force,  that  joined  with  the  indicative  mood  they  may  be 
taken  affirmatively,  but  with  the  subjunctive  mood,  hypothetically. 
For  it  is  one  thing  to  say,  if  I love  thee , I do  not  injure  thee  : but 
another  to  say,  if  I loved  thee , 1 will  not  injure  thee.  In  the  first 
proposition  love  is  affirmed  : in  the  second  not,  but  the  matter  is  put 
doubtfully.  Since  therefore  the  Evangelist  here  uses  the  indicative 


Digitized  by 


Google 


S.  JOHN’S  TOMB. 


309 


mood,  the  proposition  is  affirmative.  Moreover,  says  Trapezuntius, 
the  Fathers  in  this  place  translated  sic,  so,  instead  of  si,  if,  lest 
persons  but  slenderly  acquainted  with  the  Greek  and  Latin  tongues 
should  misunderstand  the  meaning  of  si,  because  of  its  double  force. 
The  Latin  si,  if,  therefore,  both  here  and  in  some  other  places,  is 
affirmative,  not  doubtful.  Thus  Virgil  (JEn.  vi.)  says,  If  the  fates 
call  (vocant)  thee,  that  is,  when  the  fates  call  thee \ And  in  the  same 
book,  If  Orpheus  could  (potuit)  call  back  the  manes  of  his  wife,  he 
affirms  that  he  could. 

Observe  from  the  words,  So  I will  him  to  tarry  till  I come , many 
have  thought  that  John  is  not  dead,  but  will  come  with  Elias  and 
Enoch  to  contend  with  Antichrist.  Indeed  the  angel  seems  to 
assert  this  in  the  Apocalypse,  saying  to  John,  “Thou  must  prophesy 
again  before  the  Gentiles.”  (Rev.  x.  ii.)  So  thought  Hippolytus 
(Tract  de  Consummate  Sceculi),  Dorotheus,  and  Metaphrastes  (Life of 
S.  John),  Damascene  (Orat.  de  Trans.)  The  latter  supports  his 
opinion  by  Luke  ix.  27  : “There  be  some  standing  here  which  shall 
not  taste  of  death  until  they  see  the  kingdom  of  God.”  So,  too,  S. 
Ambrose  understands  the  passage  (lib.  vii.  in  Luc.)  Theophylact, 
Salmeron,  and  Barradi  are  all  inclined  to  take  the  same  view. 

Others,  again,  whom  S.  Augustine  refutes,  think  that  S.  John  is 
alive  within  the  tomb,  because  the  earth  above  his  sepulchre 
is  said  to  quiver;  and  think  that  this  is  occasioned  by  S.  John’s 
breathing. 

But  I say  it  is  far  more  like  the  truth,  and  to  myself  a matter  of 
certainty,  that  S.  John  died  a natural  death. 

This  is  the  general  tradition  of  the  Fathers,  as  Irenaeus,  Ter- 
tullian,  Eusebius,  SS.  Jerome,  Augustine  and  Chrysostom,  S.  Am- 
brose, Bede  and  others.  From  whom  Baronius  gathers  that  S.  John 
died  a.d.  10 1,  in  the  ninth  year  of  Pope  Clement,  the  second  year  of 
Trajan’s  reign,  sixty-eight  from  Christ’s  crucifixion,  and  of  his  age  the 
ninety-third.  I say  he  died  at  Ephesus,  and  was  buried  near  that 
city,  and  was  succeeded  in  the  bishopric  of  Ephesus  by  Onesimus# 
the  disciple  of  S.  Paul.  The  tradition  of  the  Church  which  cele- 
brates the  Feast  of  S.  John  as  departed  this  life,  and  as  now  reigning 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


310  S.  JOHN,  C.  XXI. 

with  Christ  in  heaven,  confirms  this.  For  this  is  the  lot  of  none 
except  after  death. 

Gregory  of  Tours  (Hist.  Franc,  lib . i.  c.  26)  describes  the  way  in 
which  S.  John  died.  “John  the  Evangelist,  an  old  man  and  full  of 
days,  kid  himself  down  in  his  tomb.”  And  in  his  first  book  on  the 
glory  of  the  Martyrs  he  says,  “John  went  down  alive  into  the  tomb, 
and  commanded  it  to  be  covered  with  earth.  Now  from  his  sepul- 
chre there  is  an  abundant  supply  of  manna  like  fine  meal,  from 
which  the  blessed  relics  are  carried  all  over  the  world,  and  afford 
healing  to  the  sick.”  Peter  Damian  says  in  his  second  Sermon  on  S. 
John,  “Who  is  there  whom  the  marvellous  strangeness  of  this  happy 
migration  does  not  move  ? Who  does  not  wonder  at  the  glory  of 
this  most  happy  consummation?  For  he  who  lived  marvellously 
died  also  marvellously.  And  forasmuch  as  he  did  not  lead  the 
common  life  of  men,  he  passed  not  hence  by  a common  death.  For 
as  histories  relate,  he  ordered  a square  chamber  to  be  constructed  in 
the  church,  and  by  and  by  descended  into  it.  Then  stretching  forth 
his  hands,  he  remained  a long  while  in  prayer,  and  so  passed  to 
eternity.  In  a short  space  so  great  a light  shone  upon  him  from 
heaven,  that  no  one  could  bear  to  look  at  it.  After  that  the  chamber 
was  found  to  contain  only  manna,  which,  as  is  said,  it  continues  tc 
produce  abundantly  until  this  very  day.  For  so  it  seemed  good 
that  the  disciple  who  was  so  dear  to  the  Author  of  life  should  depart 
out  of  this  world,  and  that  he  should  be  a stranger  to  the  pangs  of 
death  who  had  been  a stranger  to  the  corruption  of  the  flesh.” 

Nicephorus  adds  that  the  body  of  S.  John,  like  that  of  the  Blessed 
Virgin,  was  not  found  in  his  sepulchre,  but  that  it  rose  again,  and 
was  raised  by  Christ  to  heaven.  S.  Ambrose  makes  mention  of  this 
opinion  (Serm.  20.  in  Ps.  cxviii.)  S.  Thomas  also,  and  B.  Peter 
Damian  held  this  as  a pious  opinion.  Nevertheless  it  has  no  sure 
foundation  either  in  Scripture,  or  in  the  tradition  of  the  Ancients. 
Indeed  it  is  opposed  to  the  fact  that  in  the  Council  of  Ephesus 
the  relics  of  the  martyrs,  and  especially  of  S.  John,  were  ordered  to 
be  collected.  And  Pope  Celestine,  in  his  epistle  to  the  Council  of 
Ephesus,  says,  “ Before  all  things  ye  ought  especially  to  consider, 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


WHY  IS  S.  JOHN  CALLED  MARTYR.  311 

and  again  and  again  call  to  mind  (these  things),  you,  to  whom  John 
the  Apostle  preached,  whose  relics  present  with  you  ye  honour.” 

If  then  the  relics  of  S.  John  were  at  Ephesus,  he  cannot  yet 
have  risen  again,  unless  any  one  should  maintain  that  they  were  the 
relics,  not  of  his  body,  but  of  his  clothes,  his  books,  &c.,  or  possibly 
of  his  hair  and  beard.  Be  this  as  it  may,  it  is  not  possible  at  the 
present  time  to  find  any  other  relics  of  the  body  of  S.  John. 

You  will  ask,  how  is  it  that  S.  John  is  called  by  the  Fathers  and 
the  Church  a martyr,  if  he  died  a natural  death?  I reply,  with 
S.  Jerome,  that  S.  John  was  a martyr  because  he  was  thrown  into 
a caldron  of  boiling  oil  at  Rome  before  the  Latin  Gate  by  the 
Emperor  Domitian  on  account  of  his  preaching  Christ,  as  Tertullian 
testifies  ( de  Prcescrip . c.  36).  The  most  ancient  testimony  of  the 
Roman  Church  confirms  this.  In  memory  thereof  a church  has 
been  erected  on  the  site,  and  the  Church  has  appointed  a yearly 
commemoration  of  the  same  on  the  6th  of  May.  For  although  & 
John  did  not  then  die,  but  came  out  of  the  caldron  unhurt,  yet 
because  he  willingly  offered  himself  to  such  a cruel  death  for  the 
sake  of  Christ,  and  because  that  boiling  oil  would  naturally  and 
necessarily  have  produced  death,  unless  he  had  been  miraculously 
preserved  unhurt,  therefore  S.  John  was  truly  a martyr,  and  is  rightly 
called  a martyr. 

Moreover,  this  present  passage,  as  well  as  S.  Luke  ix.  27,  and 
Revelation  x.  n,  as  I there  show,  do  not  favour  a contrary  opinion. 
For  the  meaning  is,  (1.)  “ I wish  thee,  O Peter,  to  follow  Me  by  the 
cross,  but  John  I will  to  remain  so  {sic),  i.e.,  without  the  cross,  or  a 
violent  death,  until  I come,  that  having  died  by  a natural  death  I 
should  take  him  to  Myself  in  heaven.”  So  S.  Augustine,  Bede,  &c. 

(2.)  It  may  mean,  “ I will  John  to  abide  in  life  until  I come  to 
the  public  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  Until  I come,  by  means  of 
Titus  and  the  Romans,  to  avenge  the  death  of  Myself  as  Messiah 
by  the  destruction  of  the  whole  Jewish  nation.  For  S.  Peter  and 
the  rest  of  the  Apostles  were  put  to  death  before  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem.  S.  John  alone  of  the  Apostles  survived  it.  So  those 
two  brethren,  James  and  John,  were  the  beginning  and  the  end  of 


Digitized  by  V joogle 


312  S.  JOHN,  C.  XXI. 

the  Apostolic  martyrdoms.  So  Theophylact  and  others.  Some 
add  with  Theophylact  that  S.  John  remained  in  Judea  until  its 
destruction,  and  that  it  was  that  which  was  meant  by  Christ. 

Christ  willed  S.  John  to  survive  for  so  long  a time  for  four  reasons. 
The  first  was  that  John  might  be  a foundation  and  pillar  of  the 
Church  against  the  already  nascent  heretics,  and  that  he  might  testify 
to  all  that  the  words  and  deeds  of  Christ  which  were  written  by  the 
other  Evangelists,  as  well  as  by  himself  in  this  Gospel,  are  most  true, 
yea,  that  he  saw  them  with  his  eyes,  and  heard  them  with  his  ears. 
2d.  That  this  his  longevity  might  stand  in  the  place  of  martyrdom,  for 
John  greatly  desired  to  die,  that  he  might  enjoy  Christ,  saying  as 
he  did  at  the  end  of  the  Apocalypse,  Come , Lord  Jesus . 3d.  That 

when  the  destruction  of  Judea  was  at  hand  he  might  warn  the 
Christians  to  depart  out  of  it.  4th.  That  he  might  testify  to  all 
that  the  destruction  of  the  Jews  was  caused  by  their  having  put 
Christ  to  death,  and  that  it  had  been  foretold  by  Christ,  and  that 
he  might  by  this  strengthen  believers  in  the  faith  of  Christ  and 
convert  the  unbelieving  Jews. 

Lastly,  whether  you  read  ij  or  so,  the  meaning  will  be  the  same 
if  si  be  understood.  Wherefore  some  read  si  sic  (if  so),  as  if  Christ 
said,  11  Granted  that  I wish  John  to  remain,  what  is  it  to  thee?” 

Moreover,  S.  Csesarius,  the  brother  of  S.  Gregory  Nazianzen, 
(Dial.  5),  gives  this  fresh  interpretation,  “ I wish  John  to  remain  here 
by  the  sea  of  Galilee but  this  seems  too  literal  and  frigid. 

Anagogically,  the  contemplative  and  beatific  and  triumphant  life 
in  heaven  is  here  represented  in  St.  John,  and  the  active  and 
militant  life  on  earth  in  S.  Peter.  Listen  to  S.  Augustine  (Tract  1 24)  : 
“Why  did  the  Lord  love  John  the  most  when  Peter  loved  the 
Lord  the  most  ? By  so  much  I understand  he  is  better  who  most 
loves  Christ,  but  he  is  happier  whom  Christ  most  loves.  I think 
then  that  two  modes  of  life  are  here  signified,  one  which  is  in  faith 
by  the  Apostle  Peter,  on  account  of  the  primacy  of  his  apostleship ; 
and  therefore  it  is  said  to  him,  Follow  Me,  by  imitation,  viz.,  in 
bearing  temporal  ills.  But  the  other  life,  which  is  in  hope,  by  S. 
John,  concerning  whom  it  is  said,  So  1 will  him  to  tarry  till  1 come. 


Digitized  by 


ioogle 


THE  VIRGIN  LIFE. 


313 


when,  that  is,  I am  about  to  give  him  everlasting  blessings.  I^et 
perfect  action  follow  Me,  being  made  strong  by  the  example  of  my 
Passion : but  let  contemplation  remain  in  an  inchoate  condition, 
let  it  look  for  perfection  when  I come.,, 

Both  are  more  briefly  stated  in  the  Gloss : “ That  one  should 
love  most  is  for  mercy  to  be  made  manifest,  and  justice  hidden. 
Here  two  modes  of  life  are  commended  to  the  Church.  For  the 
government  of  the  storm-tossed  Church  the  keys  are  given,  for 
binding  and  loosing  sins.  For  the  sake  of  that  quiet  rest  upon  the 
bosom  of  Jesus  a man  lies  down  where  he  may  drink  of  truth.  And 
because  John  is  a virgin,  he  is  a type  of  that  life  to  come,  where 
they  neither  marry  nor  are  given  in  marriage.” 

Tropologically,  virginity,  and  the  incorruption  of  virgins,  integrity, 
and  immortality,  as  they  seem  always  to  remain  in  the  same  state 
living  and  flourishing,  are  here  represented,  since  S.  John  continued 
a very  long  time.  For  chaste  souls  imitate  the  holiness  and  purity 
of  God.  Hence  they  are  made  like  unto  God,  and  are  beloved  by 
Him.  For  this  cause  the  Blessed  Peter  Damian  calls  S.  John  an 
organ  of  the  Divine  mysteries,  a ray  of  heaven,  a celestial  eagle. 

Wherefore  that  saying  went  abroad , &c.,  namely,  that  S.  John 
would  not  die,  but  would  remain  alive  until  Christ  should  come 
at  the  day  of  judgment,  and  then  carry  him  alive  with  Him  to 
heaven.  And  no  marvel,  for,  as  I have  said  a little  above,  many 
of  the  Fathers  thought  the  same. 

Ver.  23. — Yet  Jesus  said  not,  &c.  This  is  the  correction.  John 
corrects  the  mistaken  opinion  of  the  disciples  concerning  himself, 
that  he  should  not  die.  Whence  it  may  be  gathered  that  the 
meaning  of  Christ’s  words  was  different,  and  that  John  really  died, 
as  I have  shown  upon  verse  22. 

Ver.  24. — This  is  that  disciple,  &c.,  viz.  John,  who  for  the  sake 
of  modesty  speaks  of  himself  in  the  third  person.  As  though  he 
said,  “This  is  not  the  testimony  of  myself  alone,  but  I,  and  all 
who  have  been  conversant  with  Christ,  all  who  have  been  their 
hearers  and  disciples,  know  that  this  disciple  testifies  and  writes 
the  truth.  For  at  that  time  tnere  were  but  few  survivors  of  those 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


314 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XXI. 


who  had  conversed  with  Christ,  but  many  survived  who  had  heard 
the  same  things  from  them.  For  John  wrote  this  Gospel  against 
Cerinthus,  Meander,  Ebion,  and  other  rising  heretics,  who  denied 
that  Christ  was  God,  and  therefore  detracted  from  His  preaching 
and  Gospel,  as  though  it  were  false  and  feigned. 

There  are  also  many  other  things , &c.  After  the  words  the  world 
itself,  the  Syriac  version  adds,  as  1 think . First,  S.  Augustine, 
Bede,  S.  Thomas,  and  others  explain  the  words,  the  world  itself 
could  not  contain  the  books , not  of  local  space,  but  of  the  capacity 
of  readers.  As  it  were,  “ The  whole  world  could  not  receive,  i.e. 
could  not  understand,  could  not  penetrate  the  mysteries  of  the 
doctrine  and  life  of  Christ,  because  they  are  too  profound  and 
Divine.”  But  in  this  sense  who  is  able  to  contain,  in  the  sense 
of  thoroughly  penetrating,  one  single  sentence  of  Christ  concerning 
the  mysteries  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  the  Incarnation,  the  Eucharist, 
&c.  ? 

2.  S.  Jerome  and  others  interpret  capere  by  to  receive  by  faith , 
to  beliwe  this . As  it  were,  “If  so  many,  and  such  unheard-of, 
and  stupendous  miracles  of  Christ  were  related,  worldly  men  could 
not  bear  them,  but  would  think  either  that  the  eyes  of  men  were 
deluded  by  magic  arts,  or  else  that  all  were  dreams  and  fables, 
and  that  so  many  and  such  great  things  could  not  be  done  by 
any  one.”  Therefore  the  Evangelists  say  but  little  concerning  the 
greatest  miracles.  But  to  this  is  opposed  that  the  unbelieving  would 
believe  not  one  single  miracle  of  Christ,  whilst  the  faithful  would 
have  believed  them  all.  Observe,  moreover,  the  Evangelist  says 
books,  not  miracles . 

3.  And  giving  the  true  meaning,  the  words  are  an  hyperbole. 
As  though  it  were  said,  If  every  one  of  the  words  and  deeds  of 
Christ  were  written  down,  so  many  and  so  great  things  would  have 
to  be  written,  that  the  world  would  be  filled  with  books — so  many 
books  would  require  to  be  written,  that  they  would  be,  so  to  say, 
innumerable.  Thus  it  is  commonly  said,  In  such  a library  there 
are  books  innumerable,  that  is  very  many.  Such  is  the  expression 
in  chap.  xii.  19,  “ The  whole  world  is  gone  after  Him,”  meaning, 


Digitized  by  V google 


all  Christ’s  acts  infinite. 


3i5 


very  many  follow  Jesus.  So  Cyril,  Chrysostom,  Bede,  Theophylact, 
Jansen,  Toletus,  and  others  From  hence  it  is  plain  that  the 
Evangelists  have  omitted  very  many  of  the  words  and  deeds  of 
Christ,  and  recorded  comparatively  few,  that  from  them  we  might 
acknowledge  Christ  to  be  both  God  and  man,  and  might,  as  the 
proverb  goes,  estimate  the  power  of  a lion  by  his  claw. 

You  may  say,  This  hyperbole  seems  extravagant,  for  the  whole 
world  could  contain  innumerable  myriads  of  books.  I reply, 
it  is  not  too  bold  an  hyperbole,  yea,  it  is  too  feeble  if  we  take  into 
account  the  greatness,  the  excellence,  and  the  majesty  of  the  things 
to  be  written.  For  observe  that  there  were  in  Christ  two  natures, 
the  Divine  and  the  human  • therefore  His  actions  had  a twofold,  yea 
a threefold,  character.  First,  in  that  they  were  Divine,  He  knew 
all  things,  and  comprehended  all  things,  He  loved  the  Father 
with  an  infinite  love,  He  breathed  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  so  on. 
Which  things,  were  they  to  be  written  about  in  accordance  with 
their  worthiness,  infinite  books  must  be  written,  which  the  world 
could  not  contain.  For  however  many  might  be  written  by  men, 
they  could  not  adequately  set  forth,  much  less  exhaust,  one  single 
Divine,  and  therefore  altogether  infinite,  action  of  Christ  So 
Christ  by  one  word  and  conception  of  His  mind,  knows  all  things, 
comprehends  them,  saith  and  speaks  them.  Moreover,  one  such 
word  of  His  is  so  fruitful  and  sublime  that  all  angels  and  men 
could  not  adequately  and  fully  express  it  in  an  infinite  number  of 
words  and  books.  Indeed,  one  of  the  Seraphim  knows  more,  says 
and  does  more,  in  a single  act  than  the  infirm  angels  and  men  in 
many  acts.  Much  more  is  this  so  with  Christ,  who  far  surpasses 
all  the  Seraphim.  This  second  sort  of  Christ’s  actions  were  human 
acts,  such  as  to  speak,  to  eat , to  walk.  If  these  be  regarded  merely 
as  human  acts,  they  might  be  written  in  a few  books.  But  if  they 
be  regarded  as  they  were  done  by  Christ,  and  directed  by  the 
interior  spirit  of  prudence,  charity,  and  the  other  virtues,  they  could 
not  be  worthily  described  by  any  human  pen,  because  no  one 
could  by  writing  adequately  express  the  spirit  and  virtues  of  Christ. 
For  Christ  did  all  His  works  with  all  their  accompaniments  so 


Digitized  by 


Google 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XXL 


316 

perfectly,  so  angelically,  that  no  authors  could  perfectly  set  them 
forth  before  the  eyes  of  men.  For  each  several  action  of  Christ 
contained  in  itself  so  many  virtues,  excellences,  and  perfections, 
that  it  could  not  be  equalled  by  any  number  of  our  actions. 

The  third  kind  of  the  actions  of  Christ  were  mixed,  i.e.  partly 
human,  and  partly  Divine.  These  therefore  are  called  by  S.  Dionysius 
theandric , i.e.  Divinely-human  actions . Such  are  to  preach  the  Gospel, 
to  raise  the  dead,  to  institute  the  Eucharist  and  the  other  Sacraments, 
things  which  Christ  did  as  man,  but  in  which  He  was  directed  by 
the  Deity,  hypostatically  united  to  Himself.  Far  less  then  can  these 
actions,  regarded  as  to  their  worthiness,  be  adequately  unfolded  and 
set  forth  by  all  the  writers  who  are,  have  been,  or  ever  will  be. 
For  they  are  actions  directly  emanating  from  God,  and  therefore 
containing  in  themselves  a Divine  power  and  excellency,  which  far 
surpass  the  genius  and  ability  of  all  authors  to  write  them,  according 
to  the  words  in  Job  (xi.  7),  “Canst  thou  comprehend  the  footsteps 
of  God,  and  find  out  the  Almighty  to  perfection  ? He  is  higher  than 
heaven,  what  wilt  thou  do  ? Deeper  than  hell,  whence  wilt  thou  know? 
The  measure  is  longer  than  the  earth,  broader  than  the  sea.” 

Lastly,  the  truth  of  this  hyperbole  is  made  plain  by  the  event 
and  experience.  For  we  see  every  year  so  many  discourses, 
lectures,  sermons,  concerning  the  life  and  deeds  of  Christ,  so  many 
books  written,  so  many  commentaries,  that  to  enumerate  them  would 
be  impossible.  And  so,  if  the  world  were  to  endure  for  ever,  the 
same  thing  would  go  on  from  year  to  year.  If  all  were  to  be 
gathered  in  one  (at  last),  the  world  could  not  contain  them.  Where- 
fore S.  Leontius  ( Serm . de  Nativ . 9)  saith,  “The  greatness  of  the 
Divine  working  exceeds  the  capacity  of  human  speech.  Never 
therefore  will  subjects  of  thanksgiving  fail,  because  the  abundance  of 
them  that  praise  will  never  cease.” 

Tropologically : From  hence  learn  of  Christ  to  fulfil  thy  years 
with  virtues.  Be  continually  occupied  in  the  doing  of  many  great 
and  heroic  works  of  virtue.  Go  from  virtue  to  virtue  until  thou 
shalt  see  the  God  of  gods  in  Sion.  As  Zeuxis  the  illustrious  painter 
said,  “ I paint  for  eternity,”  so  say  thou,  “ I live  for  eternity.”  Say 


Digitized  by  * 


,oogl 


FAITH  OF  THE  ROMAN  CHURCH.  3 1 7 

to  thyself,  I am  painting  the  picture  of  a holy  life.  I am  painting  a 
portrait  which  I may  show  to  God  and  the  angels  in  heaven,  to  be 
for  ever  before  their  eyes,  that  the  blessed  ones  may  admire  it,  and 
praise  it  through  all  eternity.  Imitate  Christ  therefore,  and  follow 
His  life  and  faith.  That  faith  is  the  true  and  ancient  faith  which 
Christ  delivered  to  Peter,  Peter  to  his  successors  the  Supreme  Pon- 
tiffs and  the  Roman  Church,  to  be  as  it  were  a deposit  to  be  kept 
inviolable.  Flee  therefore  from  every  novelty  in  the  faith,  which 
the  innovators  fashion  of  themselves,  and  thrust  upon  thee.  For  a 
new  faith  is  faithless,  deceitful,  and  a lie.  It  is  not  faith,  but 
perfidy. 

S.  Paul,  writing  to  the  Romans,  bestows  upon  them  this  commen- 
dation (i.  8.),  “Your  faith  is  announced  in  all  the  world.”  S. 
Irenaeus,  who  was  the  disciple  of  S.  Polycarp,  and  through  him  of  S. 
John,  calls  the  Roman  Church  {Lib.  3,  caps . 3,  4)  the  rich  repository 
of  ecclesiastical  traditions,  because,  as  he  says,  “ The  Apostles  most 
fully  deposited  in  her  all  things  which  appertain  to  the  Truth,  that 
whosoever  will  may  take  from  her  the  water  (pofum)  of  life.”  S. 
Cyprian  (Ep.  45)  calls  her  the  mother  ( matriccni ) of  the  churches. 
For  to  this  Church,  that  is,  those  who  are  faithful  everywhere,  saith 
Irenaeus,  “it  is  necessary  that  every  Church  should  agree,  on 
account  of  its  more  powerful  principality,  in  which  Church  that 
tradition  which  is  from  the  Apostles  has  been  preserved  by  those 
who  are  in  every  place.”  Tertullian  (lib.  de  prczscrip.  heret.  c.  36) 
says,  “Thou  hast  Rome,  from  whence  we  too  have  authority.  O 
happy  Church,  into  which  the  Apostles  with  their  blood  poured  all 
their  doctrine,  where  Peter  was  made  like  unto  the  Passion  of  the 
Lord,  where  Paul  was  crowned  after  the  manner  of  John  the  Baptist, 
where  the  Apostle  John  was  immersed  in  boiling  oil  and  felt  no  hurt.” 
Again,  S.  Jerome  saith  (Pref.  in  l.  2,  Com.  in  Ep.  ad  Galat.),  “ Do 
you  wish  to  know,  O Paula  and  Eustochium,  how  the  Apostle 
delineated  every  province  by  its  own  characteristics  ? Even  until 
this  very  day  the  vestiges  remain  both  of  their  virtues  and  their 
faults.  The  faith  of  the  Roman  Christians  is  commended.  Where 
indeed  are  the  churches  still  frequented  with  so  much  zeal  as  at 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


3i8 


S.  JOHN,  C.  XXI. 


Rome  ? Where  is  there  such  flocking  to  the  torpbs  of  the  martyrs  ? 
Where  do  the  Amens  so  resound  like  peals  of  heavenly  thunder, 
whilst  the  deserted  idol  temples  shake  to  their  foundations?  All 
this  is  not  because  the  Romans  have  any  different  faith  from  that  of 
all  the  churches  of  Christ,  but  because  their  devotion  and  their 
childlike  faith  is  greater.” 

Learn  therefore  the  Gospel  and  the  faith  of  Christ  from  the 
Roman  Church : and  show  it  forth  in  your  life  and  conduct.  And 
daily  make  much  progress  therein,  so  shalt  thou  follow  Christ, 
and  be  with  Him  in  heavenly  glory.  The  work  which  here 
thou  workest  in  a moment  shall  abide  for  ever,  and  give  thee 
gladness.  The  work  which  here  thou  workest  not,  thou  shalt 
lose  everlastingly,  so  that  never  more  shalt  thou  be  able  to  compass 
it.  This  will  God  Himself  require  of  thee  in  the  last  and  fateful  day 
of  the  universe,  when  with  all  His  angels  the  Judge  shall  sit  upon 
His  throne,  to  take  account  of  the  quick  and  the  dead,  and  to  try 
thee  as  to  thy  Christian  life  and  profession,  that  if  thou  hast  followed 
the  right  path  He  may  award  thee  heaven,  but  if  not,  consign  thee 
to  hell.  It  is  here  thou  castest  the  die  for  eternity.  Take  heed  that 
thou  castest  aright.  For  the  throw  once  cast  may  never  be  recalled. 

Believe,  Study,  Live,  Paint,  for  Eternity. 

O how  long,  O how  deep,  O how  infinite,  O how  blessed,  or  else 
how  miserable,  is  that  Mistress  of  everlasting  ages,  that  endless,  that 
ever-enduring  eternity.  “ O frail  man  ! how  little  is  all  thou  doest 
for  the  hope  of  eternity.” — Eusebius  Emissenus . 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  EPISTLES  GENERAL  OF 


S.  JOHN. 


Digitized  by  LnOOQle 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE 
OF  S.  JOHN. 


0 

I mention  three  things  by  way  of  preface.  First,  concerning  the 
authority  of  the  Epistle.  Second,  concerning  the  author.  Third, 
concerning  the  argument. 

i.  It  is  of  faith  that  this  Epistle  is  canonical  Scripture.  This  is 
the  general  belief  of  the  whole  Church,  expressed  both  elsewhere 
and  in  the  Council  of  Trent  (scss.  4).  Here  observe  that  the 
canonical  books  of  Holy  Scripture  are  of  two  kinds.  The  first  are 
called  proto -canonical,  because  they  have  been  accounted  canonical 
in  all  ages  by  all  Christians,  so  that  of  their  authority  none  of  the 
orthodox  have  ever  been  in  doubt 

The  second  kind  are  called  dcutcro-canonical , because  at  one  time 
the  Church  or  the  Fathers  doubted  of  their  authority,  but  they  were 
subsequently  received  into  the  canon  by  all  men.  Such  are  the 
books  of  Esther,  Baruch,  part  of  Daniel,  Tobias,  Judith,  Wisdom, 
Ecclesiasticus,  two  books  of  the  Maccabees,  certain  portions  of  the 
Gospels  of  S.  Mark,  S.  Luke,  or  S.  John,  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews, 
the  Epistle  of  James,  the  second  of  Peter,  the  second  and  third  of 
John,  the  Epistle  of  Jude,  and  the  Apocalypse.  All  the  rest  are 
proto-canonical.  Among  them,  therefore,  is  this  Epistle  of  S.  John* 
with  the  exception  of  one  verse,  concerning  which  in  its  place.  This 
is  what  Eusebius  says  of  this  Epistle  ( H.  E.  3.  24),  “ Among  those 
things  which  John  wrote  after  his  Gospel,  his  first  Epistle  is  also 
received  both  by  the  ancients  and  the  moderns  without  any  hesita- 
tion.” Moreover,  it  is  equally  received  by  ancient  and  modern 

vou  v.  x 


Digitized  by  LnOOQle 


322  PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  S.  JOHN. 

heretics.  And  S.  Augustine  says  (Tract.  7,  in  Epis . 1 Joan.\  “That 
Epistle  is  canonical  which  is  read  by  all  nations,  is  accepted  by  the 
authority  of  the  whole  world,  which  itself  has  edified  the  whole 
world.”  And  Dionysius  of  Alexandria,  says,  “ The  Gospel  and  the 
first  Epistle  of  John  are  not  only  without  fault,  but  are  written  with 
the  utmost  elegancy  of  style,  the  greatest  weight  of  their  sentiments 
and  with  perfect  diction.” 

2.  The  orthodox  are  all  agreed  that  the  author  of  this  Epistle  is 
S.  John  the  Apostle,  as  the  inscription  gives  it.  The  same  is  indi- 
cated by  the  style  of  the  Epistle  in  all  things  agreeable  to  S.  John’s 
Gospel,  so  beautiful,  and  flowing  with  the  honey  of  charity,  plainly 
indicating  its  source,  the  fair  and  loving  breast  of  S.  John.  Add  to 
this  that  he  inculcates  the  same  things  in  this  Epistle  which  he  does 
in  his  Gospel,  as  Eusebius  well  observes  (H.  E . 7.  25),  “ He  who 
reads  carefully  will  find  frequently  in  both,  the  words  ‘ life/  ‘ light/ 
‘departure  from  darkness/  ‘the  truth/  ‘grace/  ‘joy/  ‘the  flesh  and 
blood  of  the  Lord/  ‘judgment/  ‘the  remission  of  sins/  ‘the  love 
of  God  towards  us/  ‘ the  command  to  love  one  another/  ‘ the  rebuke 
of  the  world,  the  devil,  and  antichrist/  ‘ the  promise  of  the  Holy 
Ghost he  will  find  everywhere  ‘ the  Father  and  the  Son.’  And  if 
the  character  of  both  writings  be  observed  in  all  things,  there  will  be 
found  altogether  the  same  sense  and  form  of  expression  in  both  the 
Gospel  and  the  Epistle.” 

3.  The  object  of  the  Epistle  is,  first,  to  teach  the  true  faith,  hope, 
and  charity:  the  faith  both  concerning  the  Holy  Trinity  and  the 
Incarnate  Word,  of  which  assuredly  no  one  has  treated  more  fruit- 
fully than  S.  John  both  in  his  Gospel  and  in  this  Epistle.  And  for 
this  reason  he  is  called  by  S.  Dionysius,  Athanasius,  Cyril,  Chrysostom, 
Epiphanius  and  others  generally,  John  the  Theologian. 

Moreover,  this  is  a Catholic  Epistle,  that  is  circular  and  general, 
written  to  all  Christians  throughout  the  world,  like  the  Epistles  of 
S.  Peter,  S.  James,  and  S.  Jude.  Some,  however,  of  the  ancients  say 
that  this  Epistle  of  John  was  written  expressly  to  the  Parthians.  So 
Pope  Hyginus  (Epist.  1),  Pope  John  II.  ( Epist . 1 ad  Valer.\  S. 
Augustine  (Lib.  2 quasi.  Evang.  c.  39),  Idacius  (Lib.  de  Trin.)  and 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  S.  JOHN.  323 

others.  Our  Serarius  suspects  that  Patmos  ought  here  to  be  read 
instead  o iParthos.  For  John  being  banished  by  Domitian  to  the  Isle 
of  Patmos,  converted  its  inhabitants  to  Christ.  Junius,  a Calvinist, 
against  Rellarmine  (Lib.  2 de  Verbo  Dei,  cap . 15  num.  22),  understands 
by  Parthians,  not  the  inhabitants  of  Parthia,  but  pious  exiles  distant 
from  their  native  land.  For  in  the  Scythian  language  exiles  were 
formerly  called  Parthi,  from  the  Hebrew  word  pur,  ie.  to  divide . 
To  the  Parthians , then,  would  mean  the  same  thing  as  to  the  tribes 
which  are  in  the  dispersion,  as  S.  James  says  in  his  Epistle,  and 
" to  the  elect  strangers  of  the  dispersion,”  as  S.  Peter  says,  in  the 
beginning  of  his  Epistle.  But  exiles,  impious  as  well  as  pious,  were 
called  Parthi  by  the  Scythians,  not  by  the  Greeks  or  Hebrews,  such 
as  was  St.  John.  For  otherwise  S.  Peter  and  S.  James,  who  write  to 
the  dispersed,  would  have  written  to  the  Parthians.  Properly,  there- 
fore, I understand  Parthians  here  to  mean  those  whose  name  and 
empire  were  at  that  time  widely  extended,  and  embraced  several 
nations,  the  Persians  among  them.  Now  there  are  in  Parthia  many 
Jews  as  well  as  Christians,  both  of  Jewish  and  Gentile  extraction,  to 
all  of  whom  S.  John  here  writes. 

S.  John  then  wrote  to  the  Parthians,  either  because  he  had 
formerly  been  amongst  them  and  taught  them  the  faith  of  Christ,  as 
Baronius  and  others  think,  or  else  because  many  of  the  Ephesians 
and  other  natives  of  Asia  Minor,  to  whom  S.  John  had  preached, 
and  who  had  been  converted  to  Christ,  had  migrated  into  the  nearer 
regions  of  Parthia  and  Persia. 

All  writers  agree  that  this  Epistle  was  written  in  Greek. 

There  is  no  reason  for  wonder  that  S.  John  does  not  give  his  name 
at  the  beginning  of  the  Epistle.  Neither  did  S.  Paul  in  the  Epistle 
to  the  Hebrews.  The  same  is  the  case  with  many  modern  writers  who 
do  not  prefix  their  names  to  the  beginning  of  their  letters,  but  sub- 
scribe them  at  the  end.  Besides,  the  Holy  Spirit  was  the  Author  of  this 
Epistle  rather  than  S.  John.  As  S.  Gregory  says  (Prcefat.  in  Job  c. 
i.),  “ It  is  altogether  vain  to  ask  for  the  Author  of  this  Epistle,  since 
it  is  faithfully  believed  to  have  been  the  Holy  Ghost  He  then 
wrote  these  words  who  commanded  them  to  be  written,  If  we 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


324  PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  S.  JOHN. 

should  receive  a letter  from  any  great  man,  we  should  look  upon  it 
as  a ridiculous  question  to  ask — with  what  pen  it  had  been 
written.” 

S.  John  appears  to  have  been  an  old  man,  and  altogether  forgetful 
of  earthly  things,  and  panting  after  Christ,  both  when  he  wrote  this 
Epistle  and  also  his  Gospel.  He  was  so  absorbed  in  the  greatness 
of  the  mystery  that  he  omitted  both  his  name  and  the  salutation, 
and  by  so  doing  carries  the  reader  with  him  in  such  a manner  as  to 
intimate  that  he  was  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  as  well  as  the  Gospel. 
So  Thomas  Anglicus.  The  same  thing  is  sufficiently  indicated  by 
the  words  of  the  first  Epistle,  by  which  one  is  made  wonderfully  full 
of  sweetness  and  delight  with  Christ  Incarnate.  Lastly,  it  is  plain 
that  S.  John  wrote  these  words  in  extreme  old  age,  from  the  words 
themselves  in  which  he  calls  himself  the  Elder,  and  the  faithful  his 
little  children.  The  precise  date  when  he  wrote  is  uncertain : but 
it  seems  to  have  been  about  the  same  time  that  he  wrote  the  Gospel, 
for  there  is  a great  agreement  between  the  Epistles  and  the  Gospel. 
This  has  led  Baronius  to  assign  the  same  date  to  both,  namely, 
A.D.  99,  which  was  the  seventh  year  of  Pope  S.  Clement,  and  the 
first  of  the  Emperor  Nerva. 

S.  Gregory  concludes  with  the  following  golden  words  {Horn.  15 
in  Ezech.) : " Do  we  seek  to  have  our  hearts  inflamed  with  the  fire 
of  love?  Then  let  us  ponder  over  the  words  of  S.  John,  for  every- 
thing that  he  says  is  filled  with  the  fire  of  love.”  He  breathes, 
repeats  and  enforces  nothing  else  but  the  love  of  God,  of  Christ,  and 
of  our  neighbour.  He  is  like  old  men  and  lovers,  who  think  and 
speak  of  nothing  else  but  what  they  love  and  have  loved  all  their 
live*. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF 

S.  JOHN. 


o 

CHAPTER  I. 

I  He  describeth  the  person  of  Christy  in  whom  we  have  eternal  life,  by  a com - 
tnunion  with  God:  5 to  which  we  must  adjoin  holiness  of  life , to  testify  the 
truth  of  that  our  communion  and  profession  of  faith , as  edso  to  assure  us  of  the 
forgiveness  of  our  sins  by  Christ* s death . 

THAT  which  was  from  the  beginning,  which  we  have  heard,  which  we  have 
seen  with  our  eyes,  which  we  have  looked  upon,  and  our  hands  have 
handled,  of  the  Word  of  life  ; 

2  (For  the  life  was  manifested,  and  we  have  seen  it,  and  bear  witness,  and 
shew  unto  you  that  eternal  life,  which  was  with  the  Father,  and  was  manifested 
unto  us ;) 

3  That  which  we  have  seen  and  heard  declare  we  unto  you,  that  ye  also  may 
have  fellowship  with  us : and  truly  our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father,  and  with 
his  Son  Jesus  Christ. 

4  And  these  things  write  we  unto  you,  that  your  joy  may  be  full. 

5  This  then  is  the  message  which  we  have  heard  of  him,  and  declare  unto  you, 
that  God  is  light,  and  in  him  is  no  darkness  at  all. 

6  If  we  say  that  we  have  fellowship  with  him,  and  walk  in  darkness,  we  lie, 
and  do  not  the  truth  : 

7  But  if  we  walk  in  the  light,  as  he  is  in  the  light,  we  have  fellowship  one  with 
another,  and  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin. 

8  If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us. 
9 If  we  confess  our  sins,  he  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to 
cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness. 

10  If  we  say  that  we  have  not  sinned,  we  make  him  a liar,  and  his  word  is  not 
in  us. 

Ver.  1. — That  which  was  from  the  beginning,  &c.  The  beginning 
of  this  Epistle  corresponds  with  the  beginning  of  St.  John’s  Gospel. 
Both  here  and  there  he  sets  forth  the  eternity  and  the  Godhead  of 


Digitized  by  LnOOQle 


326  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  1. 

Christ,  and  next  His  Incarnation,  these  being  the  two  chief  Mys- 
teries, and  the  cardinal  points,  of  the  whole  Christian  faith. 

The  word  * was  * points,  says  St.  Basil,  4 to  eternity,1 14  that  thus  we 
might  understand,”  says  Bede,  44  that  the  Word  which  was  coetemal 
with  the  Father  was  before  all  time,”  for  whatever  time  you  may 
assign,  or  imagine  beforehand,  it  is  true  to  say  that  the  Word  then 
was ; thousands,  or  millions  of  years,  or  ever  the  world  was,  for  He 
was  before  any  imaginable  number  of  years,  even  from  all  eternity. 
Nor  does  it  mean  merely  that  He  was  before  the  beginning  of  the 
world,  and  of  time,  but  that  even  then  He  was  from  all  past  eternity. 
And  we  speak  of  the  Word  in  the  imperfect,  and  not  in  the  past 
time,  to  signify  that  He  still  exists.  So  St.  Cyril,  Chrysostom, 
Theophylact,  and  others,  on  John  i.  i.  And  St.  John  wrote  thus 
against  the  Arians  who  would  afterwards  arise,  and  say  that  there  was 
a time  when  He  was  not,  denying  that  He  was  eternal.  This  also 
was  condemned  by  the  Nicene  Council,  and  therefore  St.  John 
repeats  the  word  4 was * to  show  that  whatever  time  you  may  think 
of,  or  imagine,  the  Word  at  that  very  time  4 was  *.  44  Carry  your 

thoughts  back  (says  St.  Basil,  Contr . Eunom.)  as  far  as  you  can,  and 
you  will  not  be  able  to  rise  beyond  that  time.” 

Ver.  2. — But  the  word  signifies  not  only  His  eternity,  but  His 
eternal  generation,  and  (3.)  His  Godhead,  for  4 Being  * or  existence, 
as  Elias  Cretensis  says,  is  peculiar  (proprium)  to  God.  For  He  is 
the  fulness  and  boundlessness  of  being,  a very  boundless  ocean  of 
being.  Whence  Didymus  (in  toe.),  S.  Cyril  (in  John  i.),  and  S.  Ambrose 
(de  Fide  L 5)  acutely  observe  that  the  several  creatures  are  said  to  be 
this  or  that,  but  that  God  alone  is  said  absolutely  to  be.  (4.)  The 
word  4 was  * signifies  that  the  4 Word  * still  exists  and  abides.  Thus 
St  Thomas  says  on  John  i.,  4 Was ’ signifies  past,  present,  and  future 
time.  The  Word  then  ever  was,  ever  is,  and  ever  will  be.  As  St. 
Basil  says  (de  Sp . Sancto , cap.  vl)  When  John  said  4 In  thebe- 
ginning  was  the  Word 9 he  confines  our  thoughts  within  fixed  limits. 
For  the  word  ‘was’  allows  our  thoughts  no  outlet;  and  the  word 
4 beginning*  keeps  our  thoughts  also  from  soaring  beyond  it,  for 
however  thou  mayest  strive  to  see  ought  beyond  the  Son,  yet  wilt 


' ed  by  v^iOOQLe 


ETERNITY  OF  CHRIST. 


3^7 


thou  never  be  able  to  pass  beyond  ‘the  beginning.*  But  if  we 
speak  correctly  of  God,  His  eternity  cannot  be  bounded  by  any  time 
whatsoever.  For,  as  St  Gregory  Nazianzen  says,  ‘God  both  ever 
was,  and  is,  and  will  be.  Or,  to  speak  more  correctly,  He  ever  is . 
But  our  expressions  designate  only  the  flow  and  lapse  of  time.  As 
St.  Augustine  says,  “I  separate  in  my  mind  every  mutable  thing 
from  eternity,  and  in  eternity  itself  I discern  no  spaces  of  time,  for 
they  consist  in  past  and  future  motions,  but  in  eternity  there  is 
nothing  past  or  future,  for  the  past  has  ceased  to  be,  and  future  has 
not  come  into  being ; while  eternity  only  is : it  has  not  passed  away 
as  ceasing  to  be,  nor  is  it  future  as  not  yet  existing.  Plato  says 
the  same.  Why  then  does  the  Vulgate  use  the  perfect  and  not  the 
imperfect  tense?  1.  Because  St.  John  in  what  follows  uses  the 
perfect  tense.  2.  Because  ‘first’  signifies  more  clearly  that  the 
Word  was  from  the  beginning.  3.  Both  these  tenses  are  used  indis. 
criminately,  as  St.  Ambrose  uses  the  imperfect  tense;  and  lastlyf 
Holy  Scripture  uses  both  past,  present,  and  future  tenses  in  speak- 
ing of  God,  for  His  eternity  includes  them  all.  As  S.  Augustine 
says  ( Tract  xcix.  in  John),  “Although  the  immutable  and  ineffable 
nature  of  God  admits  not  of  past  or  future  time,  but  simply  Is  as 
incapable  of  change,  yet  because  time  is  ever  changing  with  us  (in 
this  our  mortal  and  changeable  state)  we  say  not  falsely,  He  hath 
been,  He  shall  be,  He  is : hath  been,  because  He  has  never  ceased 
to  be ; shall  be,  because  He  will  never  cease  to  be ; is,  because  He 
ever  exists.” 

From  the  beginning,  referring  to  Genesis  i.  1.  But  here  there  is  a 
distinction  between  ‘ created  ’ and  ‘ was.’  God  created  the  world 
in  the  beginning  of  time  : but  He  begat  the  Son  in  the  beginning  of 
eternity,  which  is  signified  by  ‘ was.’  Tertullian  rightly  says  that  the 
Gospel  was  the  supplement  of  the  Old  Testament.  For  John  sup* 
plements  Moses,  by  putting  the  beginning  of  the  Word  before  the 
beginning  of  the  world,  which  was  created  ages  afterwards.  But  what 
then  was  this  ‘ Beginning  ’ ? 1.  S.  Cyril  and  Origen,  in  John  L,  under, 
stand  by  it  God  the  Father,  for  the  Son  was  ever  in  the  bosom  of 
the  Father.  2.  S.  Augustine,  Bede,  and  S.  Hilary  ( de  Trin.  lib . ii.) 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


328  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  1. 


understand  by  it  the  beginning  of  the  world,  or  of  time.  For  even 
before  this  the  Word  * was ’ from  all  eternity.  See  Ps.  cix.  3 (Vulg.) ; 
Prov.  viii.  25.  As  S.  Hilary  says : " Conceive  any  beginning  you 
please,  you  cannot  bound  Him  by  time,  for  He  then  was ; ” and  again, 
“ He  is  out-limited  by  any  time,  as  to  make  that  to  begin  which 
existed,  rather  than  was  made,  in  the  beginning.  3.  S.  Augustine, 
Chrysostom,  Theophylact  explain  it  that  the  Word  was  before  all 
created  beings.  See.  Prov.  viii.  22.  Nonnus  in  his  Paraphrase  says 
that  it  means,  He  was  before  all  time,  coeval  with  the  Father,  of 
the  same  nature  as  the  Father,  incomprehensible,  ineffable.  ‘ In  the 
beginning 9 then,  is  from  all  eternity  (Micah  v.  2).  For  eternity  is 
a beginning  without  beginning.  So  S.  Athanasius  ( Contr , Ar.) 
and  others.  S.  Ambrose  (de  Fide  L 5)  says  that  the  word  ‘was’ 
reaches  indefinitely.  That  which  was  in  the  beginning  is  not  in- 
cluded in  time,  is  not  preceded  by  any  beginning.”  (Pseudo)- 
Augustine,  Serm.  vl  de  temp,  (ccxxxiv.  in  App.) : “ He  who  was  in 
the  beginning  includes  within  Himself  all  beginning.”  And  Nazianzen 
( Orat \ deFide):  “Whatever  beginning  you  choose  to  assign,  will 

be  objected  to,  for  He  was  in  the  beginning.”  But  S.  Cyril  (in  John 
i.)  speaks  more  expressly : M Nothing  is  more  ancient  than  the 

beginning,  if  the  word  retains  its  proper  meaning.  In  the  beginning 
of  a beginning  cannot  be  thought  of.  For  if  it  be  conceived,  this 
first  beginning  will  be  done  away  with,  and  then  will  be  really  no 
beginning.  And  besides,  we  should  then  be  obliged  to  go  through 
an  infinite  series,  and  not  be  able  to  rest  simply  in  any  beginning 
whatsoever.”  4.  But  it  may  be  explained  thus.  The  Word  was  the 
beginning  of  the  breathing  forth  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  thus  of  the 
creation  of  all  things  (Prov.  viii  22).  The  Word  being  regarded 
as  the  pattern  or  idea  according  to  which  God  created  all  things. 
By  this  expression  John  approves  the  Divinity  of  the  Son  of  God 
against  Cerinthus  and  the  heretics  of  the  day,  who  said  that  Christ 
was  a mere  man;  as  Paul  of  Samosata,  and  Photinus  afterwards. 
The  Arians  partly  held  this  opinion,  for  though  they  allowed  that 
He  existed  before  His  birth  in  the  flesh,  yet  they  denied  His  eternal 
generation,  and  regarded  Him  as  the  first  of  all  God’s  creatures. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  BEGINNING. 


329 


This  one  expression  ‘which  was  from  the  beginning/  implicitly 
includes  the  threefold  statement  in  the  gospel : (1)  In  the  begin- 
ning was  the  Word.  (2.)  The  Word  was  with  God.  (3.)  The  Word 
was  God.  And  without  quoting  this  passage  S.  John  refers  here  to 
it,  for  that  which  was  from  all  eternity  must  necessarily  be  God  : for 
nothing  is  eternal  but  God. 

The  first  member  of  the  sentence  properly  and  explicity  sets  forth 
when  the  Word  was : then  where  He  was,  and  then  what  was  His 
essence,  and  its  identity  with  that  of  the  Father.  These  three 
blessings  did  the  Word  confer  on  us  in  His  Incarnation,  wherein 
He  betrothed  His  humanity  (as  it  were)  to  the  Eternal  Word,  and 
thus  joined  and  betrothed  to  Itself  the  whole  human  race,  that  we 
who  are  temporal  might  become  eternal,  from  being  earthly  might 
become  heavenly,  that  we  men  might  become  Gods,  in  order  that 
our  being  in  time  or  place,  our  very  essence,  might  be  firmly  fixed 
in  the  Divine  and  eternal  Word.  S.  Gregory  Nazianzen  (Orat.  xxxvii. 
on  the  Nativity)  beautifully  says,  “ The  Son  of  God,  who  was  before 
all  worlds,  invisible,  incomprehensible,  incorporeal,  that  Beginning, 
coming  from  the  Beginning,  that  Light  of  Light,  that  Fount  of  Light 
and  immortality,  that  stamp  of  the  Archetype,  that  firmly  impressed 
Seal,  betakes  Himself  to  His  own  image,  takes  upon  Him  flesh  for 
the  sake  of  flesh,  and  is  united  to  an  intellectual  soul  for  my  soul’s 
sake,  in  order  that  He  might  cleanse  like  by  like.”  And  again, 
“God  united  with  manhood  made  one  Person  of  two  contrary 
natures,  body  and  spirit,  one  of  them  being  deified  by  the  other.” 

“ O strange  union,  O wondrous  interblending ! He  who  exists  is 
made,  the  uncreated  is  created ; He  who  is  unconfined  is  (by  the 
medium  of  an  intellectual  soul)  contained  within  the  compass  of  a 
gross  body  of  flesh  ; He  who  enriches  others  suffers  poverty,  for  He 
takes  my  poor  and  humble  flesh  that  I might  attain  to  the  riches  of 
His  Divinity.  He  who  is  full  is  made  empty,  emptied  of  His  glory 
for  a short  time,  that  I might  be  made  partaker  of  His  fulness. 
What  riches  of  His  goodness ! What  a mystery  encircles  me : He 
becomes  partaker  of  my  flesh,  in  order  to  save  man  who  is  His 
image,  and  to  confer  immortality  on  our  flesh.” 


Digitized  by 


Google 


330  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  I. 


That  which  we  have  heard,  which  we  have  seen.  Lyra  refers  this 
to  the  preaching  of  John  the  Baptist,  and  what  he  pronounced 
Christ  to  be.  Didymus  and  others  to  the  prophecies  respecting 
Christ,  and  to  the  several  appearances  of  God  to  Adam,  and  the 
Patriarchs  in  the  Old  Testament.  For  though  the  whole  three 
Persons  were  manifested,  yet  it  was  specially  a manifestation  of 
the  Word  of  God,  signifying  and  anticipating  His  real  appearance, 
at  His  own  due  time,  in  the  flesh.  (See  Clement,  Constit.  v.  22  . 
Justin,  contr.  Trypho ; Origen,  Horn.  i.  in  Isa.  vi.,  &c.)  For  though 
in  all  these  appearances,  and  especially  in  that  noblest  of  all,  at  the 
giving  of  the  Law,  there  appeared,  properly  speaking,  only  the 
person  of  an  Angel  (see  Gal.  iii.  19),  yet  this  Angel  specially 
represented  the  Word  or  Son  of  God. 

But  these  instances  are  not  to  the  point,  for  the  Patriarchs  and 
Prophets  heard  and  saw  the  Word  only  darkly  and  in  type,  and  not 
as  the  Apostles  and  disciples  of  Christ  did,  which  is  what  S.  John 
here  means  (see  Heb.  i.  1 ; Matt.  xvii.  5). 

S.  John  puts  hearing  first,  sight  afterwards,  ascending  from  that 
which  is  less  certain  to  that  which  is  more  certain,  for  he  adds 
lastly,  and  our  hands  have  handled.  As  S.  Augustine  says  (de 
Diver  sis  lxi.  [al.  ccclxxi.]),  “A  man  who  could  be  seen  was  not  to  be 
followed,  but  God  was  to  be  followed  Who  could  be  seen.  In 
order  then  that  He  might  be  made  manifest,  and  be  seen  of  men, 
and  followed  by  men,  He  was  made  man.”  And  on  Ps.  xxxiii., 
“ That  man  might  not  disdain  to  follow  a humble  man,  God  humbled 
Himself,  that  the  pride  of  man  might  not  disdain  to  follow  the 
footsteps  of  God.”  See  also  S.  Gregory,  Mor.  xxix.  1 ; and  Hugh  of 
S.  Victor  {lib.  Sent.)  gives  as  one  reason  for  the  Incarnation,  “ that 
the  inward  eye  might  feast  on  His  Godhead,  the  outward  eye  on 
His  manhood.”  This  is  what  S.  Paul  speaks  of  {Tit.  iii.)  when  he 
says  that  the  love  of  God  towards  man  appeared. 

Which  we  have  seen , and  admired,  as  a most  wonderful  sight  It 
was  with  the  mind  only  that  the  Apostles  beheld  Christ’s  Godhead, 
gathering  it  from  His  doctrine,  miracles,  holiness,  &c.  The  Word 
was  both  seen  and  heard  through  the  flesh,  as  a king  is  seen  by  His 


Digitized  by 


Google 


TOUCHING  CHRIST. 


331 


people,  as  we  look  on  anything  through  a cloud,  as  fire  is  seen 
through  the  heated  metal,  &c.  And  though  the  union  of  the  Word 
with  flesh  resembled  all  these,  yet  it  was  more  perfect  than  any  of 
them,  for  all  of  them,  save  that  of  body  and  soul,  are  accidental,  but 
the  union  of  the  Word  with  the  manhood  is  substantial  It  is  not, 
however,  essential,  for  the  Divine  Essence  is  clearly  separate  and 
distinct  from  the  manhood.  But  yet  the  union  is  hypostatical  or 
personal,  the  manhood  and  the  Godhead  existing  in  the  same 
Person.  As  in  the  Eucharist,  the  Godhead  and  manhood  are  hid 
under  the  species  of  the  Bread  and  Wine.  As  S.  Chrysostom  says, 
“ Behold,  thou  seest  Christ,  thou  touchest,  thou  eatest  Him  ” {Horn. 
lx.  ad  pop.) 

And  our  hands  have  handled , just  as  blind  men  do,  touching  every- 
thing by  the  hand,  as  S.  Thomas  did  (John  xx.  27),  and  also  the 
other  Apostles  (Luke  xxiv.  39).  So  S.  Leontius  (Epist.  xcvii.),  S. 
Athanasius  (Oral,  eontr.  Arlan),  and  many  others ; though  Euthy- 
mius  thinks  that  Thomas  alone  touched  His  wounds.  And  in  their 
daily  intercourse  with  Christ  the  Apostles  must  have  touched  Him 
with  love  and  veneration  when  they  acknowledged  Him  as  God. 
For  as  Oecum.  says,  “ He  was  both  seen  and  not  seen,  tangible  and 
intangible, — speaking  as  man,  working  miracles  as  God.”  But  we 
may  fully  believe  that  S.  John  did  this  with  peculiar  devotion  and 
affection,  when  he  rested  on  His  breast.  S.  Clement  Alex,  seems 
to  say  that  Christ’s  wounds  miraculously  yielded  to  the  touch  of  the 
disciples,  so  as  to  make  them  feel  as  though  they  were  open.  S. 
Augustine,  Ambrose,  and  others  believe  that  the  wounds  remained 
open.  (See  Suarez,  par.  iii.  Disput . xlvii.  sect.  2.) 

S.  John  inculcates  and  enlarges  upon  the  doctrine  of  the  Incarna- 
tion, first  against  Basilides,  who  maintained  that  Christ  assumed 
flesh  in  appearance  only,  and  therefore  did  not  really  suffer  and 
redeem  us.  So  Epiphanius,  Hcer.  xxiv. 

Secondly,  to  confirm  the  faithful  in  their  belief  of  the  doctrine, 
and  to  convert  unbelievers  by  an  argument  derived  from  the  evidence 
of  our  senses.  He  maintains  then  that  he  himself  had  seen,  heard, 
and  touched  Christ.  So  also  S.  Peter  (Acts  x.  40).  For,  as  Tertullian 


Digitized  by 


Google 


332  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  1. 

(de  Atiim.  eh.  xvii.)  says,  “It  would  indeed  be  false  testimony,  if  our 
very  senses  proved  false.” 

Thirdly,  to  show  the  condescension  of  the  Word,  and  the  dignity 
of  the  Apostles.  For  the  Word  deigned  to  come  down  from  heaven, 
and  to  join  together  God  and  man  in  the  closest  personal  union,  so 
that  all  the  attributes  of  God  belong  to  man,  and  vice  versa , and  He 
accordingly,  through  the  attributes  of  a man,  manifests  the  attributes 
of  God  to  the  Apostles. 

In  this  way  the  intangible  became  tangible  (says  Nazianzen,  Orat. 
xxxviil  \ for  we  cannot  form  in  our  minds  any  likeness  of  God,  Who 
is  a Spirit  In  order  then  that  we  might  conceive  of  Him,  invoke 
Him,  behold,  address,  and  touch  Him,  He  was  made  man.  Whence 
Paulinus  says  (in  his  Epistle  to  Florentinus),  “ He,  our  Lord  and 
God,  Who  appeared  on  earth,  and  held  converse  with  men,  is  our 
Sheep  and  our  Shepherd.  He  is  our  Emmanuel,  God  with  us,  the 
Lord  of  Majesty,  and  the  Son  of  the  Handmaiden,  being  one  of 
these  by  nature , and  being  made  the  other.  The  same  Person  being 
the  Creator  and  the  Redeemer  of  man,  God  of  God,  Man  for  man’s 
sake,  the  Son  of  God  before  all  worlds,  the  Son  of  man  for  the  sake 
of  the  world,”  &c.  He  then,  Who  in  His  Godhead  was  our  Father, 
became,  as  it  were,  a mother  to  mankind  by  the  manhood  He 
assumed  (see  notes  on  Acts  xvii.  24  and  29),  but  also  because  God 
as  Bridegroom  took  to  Himself  our  mother — humanity — as  His 
spouse,  and  joined  it  to  Himself  in  everlasting  wedlock.  (This  was 
prefigured  by  the  marriage  of  Adam  and  Eve.)  By  His  humanity 
then  He  wedded  ourselves  and  our  nature,  to  become  our  Mother, 
as  He  was  before  that  our  Father,  in  order  that  we  might  approach 
Him  with  boldness,  as  children  who  are  afraid  of  their  father 
approach  their  mother  first  of  all,  and  obtain  their  request  (2.)  We 
therefore  invoke  Christ’s  manhood,  when  we  end  all  our  prayers 
1 through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.’  And  as  a mother  bears  a child 
in  her  womb,  and  then  trains  and  fashions  it,  so  did  Christ,  by  His 
continual  labours  for  us,  especially  on  the  cross,  conceive  us,  bring 
us  to  the  birth,  nourish  and  fashion  us.  Thirdly,  * because  the 
Incarnation  was  the  work  of  the  highest  intelligence  and  wisdom, 


D : : 7d  by 


Google 


WHO  ASSUMED  FLESH  ? 


333 


as  well  as  of  the  highest  goodness.  This  latter  is  ascribed  to  the 
Holy  Spirit,  as  the  former  to  the  Word.  But  all  of  them  are  subor- 
dinate to  the  omnipotence  of  the  Father.  He  conceived  all  things 
by  His  Word,  as  if  in  the  womb,  and  by  His  goodness  He  pours 
forth  His  bowels  of  mercy  on  us,  and  especially  through  the 
Incarnation  He  addresses  His  children  (Isa.  xlix.  15)  as  a mother. 
“ The  Gentiles,”  says  S.  Clement  {Strom,  lib . v.),  “ used  to  call  God 
AHjr^oTaropa.”  {See  S.  Augustine,  de  Civ . vii.  9.) 

In  order  that  we  may  understand  the  boundless  benefits  of  the 
Incarnation,  S.  John  suggests  four  points  for  our  consideration — 
Who?  What?  For  Whom?  and  Why? 

1.  Who  then  assumed  our  flesh?  The  eternal  Word,  the  King 
of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords,  Emmanuel,  Wonderful,  Counsellor,  &c. 
See  Isa.  ix.  6.  This  is  what  the  Church  says  in  the  Preface  for 
Christmas  Day,  “ By  the  mystery  of  the  Incarnate  Word  Thy  new 
and  bright  light  has  shone  in  the  eyes  of  our  mind,  so  that  by  visibly 
beholding  our  God  we  may  thereby  be  enraptured  with  the  love  of 
invisible  things.”  The  Divine  Nature  did  not  suffer  change  or  loss 
by  the  Incarnation,  but  remained  unaltered  in  Its  own  nature  and 
impassible.  S.  Leontius  {Serm.  x.  de  Nativ.)  says,  “The  same 
who  took  on  Him  the  form  of  a servant,  is  in  the  form  of  God. 
The  same  is  incorporeal,  and  yet  assumed  a body.  The  same 
Being  is  inviolate  in  His  own  might,  and  subject  to  suffering  in  our 
weakness.  He  was  ever  the  same  Being,  never  separated  from  His 
Father’s  throne,  and  yet  was  by  wicked  men  crucified  on  the  tree.” 
S.  Cyril  (in  John  i.  1)  compares  the  Word  made  man  to  a heated 
coal  or  iron.  As  the  fire  consumes  not  the  iron,  but  both  substances 
remain  uninjured,  in  like  manner  the  Godhead  changed  not  the 
manhood,  nor  the  manhood  the  Godhead  : both  remain  unchanged. 
This  was  signified  by  the  burning  bush.  See  too  the  three  Dialogues 
of  Theodoret,  where  he  maintains  this  against  Eutyches.  As 
Damascene  says  {Or at  i.  de  Nativ.),  “Thy  love,  O Lord,  towards 
me  was  so  great,  that  Thou  didst  not  carry  out  the  work  of  my 
redemption  by  an  angel  or  any  created  being,  but  as  Thou  didst 
create  me  at  first,  so  didst  Thou  Thyself  effect  my  redemption. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


334  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  I. 


And  S.  Augustine,  Serm.  lix.  Verb.  Dom.  (al.  lxii.),  says,  “The 
all-powerful  Physician  came  down  to  heal  the  sufferer.  He  humbled 
Himself  so  far  as  to  take  mortal  flesh,  just  as  the  physician  comes 
down  to  the  bedside  of  his  patient" 

2.  What  did  God  become  in  the  Incarnation?  He  became 
flesh,  or  man  : “ The  flesh,”  says  S.  Augustine,  “ had  blinded, 
the  Flesh  healeth  thee.  For  the  soul  became  carnal  by  yielding  to 
carnal  affections,  and  the  eyes  of  its  heart  were  thus  blinded.  But 
the  Word  was  made  flesh.  Thy  Physician  made  thee  an  eye-salve, 
that  by  His  Flesh  He  might  extinguish  the  sins  of  the  flesh.”  The 
flesh  of  man  is  wretched,  above  that  of  other  animals,  subject  to 
countless  sufferings  and  diseases,  and  corrupted  by  concupiscence. 
But  yet  the  Word  assumed  it,  and  passing  by  all  the  orders  of 
angels,  came  down  into  this  vale  of  misery,  and  united  this  very 
flesh  to  Himself  by  the  closest  bond  of  a personal  union.  Supposing 
a sheep  were  led  to  the  slaughter,  and  a man  from  love  and  com- 
passion wished  to  die  in  its  stead,  as  S.  Francis  used  to  buy  and 
set  them  free  for  love  of  Christ,  would  not  this  be  termed  an  insane 
and  extravagant  love  ? But  the  love  of  Christ  was  as  much  greater 
than  this,  as  God  surpasses  man  infinitely  more  than  a man  surpasses 
a sheep.  This  therefore  is  the  great  mystery  of  godliness  (i  Tim. 
iii.  18).  We  ought  then  to  wonder  and  be  astounded  at  this  when 
we  see  the  Infant  lying  in  the  manger,  and  say,  “ Can  this  child  be 
my  God,  the  King  of  heaven,  the  Creator  of  the  universe?”  S. 
Thomas  says  (Opusc.  lx.),  God  communicates  Himself  to  all  by  His 
presence,  to  the  just  by  His  grace,  and  above  all  to  our  flesh  by 
His  substance ; naturally,  supernaturally,  and  personally,  says 
Cajetan.  And  in  fact,  by  His  manhood  He  has  raised  all  men, 
and  through  them  the  whole  universe,  and  united  it  to  Himself,  that 
God  might  be  all  in  all.  And  again,  He  united  Himself  to  man, 
the  first  to  the  last,  for  man  was  the  last  created  of  all  things,  God 
coming  round  to  that  point  from  which  He  started. 

3.  But  for  whom  did  He  become  flesh?  For  man,  a sinner, 
and  like  to  the  vilest  worm.  “The  child  was  born,  the  Son 
was  given  for  us”  Christ  did  not  assume  our  nature  for  Him* 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


WHY  WAS  THE  WORD  MADE  MAN? 


335 


self,  as  though  He  needed  or  delighted  in  that  humanity  which  He 
assumed.  It  was  for  us.  We  were  the  ultimate  end  of  His  Incar- 
nation. For  He  was  born  in  the  flesh,  that  we  might  be  born 
spiritually  in  our  souls.  “ For  us  men,”  &c.,  in  the  Nicene  Creed. 
What,  says  S.  Anselm,  “ can  we  imagine  more  compassionate,  than 
God  saying  to  a sinner,  destined  to  eternal  punishment,  and  unable 
to  redeem  himself,  Take  My  Only  Begotten  Son,  and  offer  Him  for 
thyself;  or  for  the  Son  to  say,  ‘Take  me,  and  redeem  thyself/ 
Codrus  sacrificed  himself  for  his  country ; but  what  comparison  can 
this  bear  to  Christ,  who,  clothing  Himself  with  our  flesh,  freed  us 
from  eternal  death  and  hell,  and  made  us  heirs  of  His  heavenly 
kingdom  and  eternal  glory  ? ” 

4.  But  why  was  the  Word  made  man  ? To  deliver  man  from 
hell,  death,  sin,  and  utter  misery  of  body  and  soul.  For  the 
Word  gained  nothing  for  Himself  but  the  “ emptying  ” of  Himself, 
insults,  poverty,  death,  and  the  cross.  For  our  redemption  “He 
was  bom  in  time,  that  we  might  be  born  for  eternity,  He  was  born  in 
a stable,  that  we  might  be  born  in  heaven  ” (S.  Gregory  Nazianzen). 
Hear  S.  Augustine  (Serm.  ix.  de  Nativ.) : “ Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
who  is  from  eternity,  the  Creator  of  all  things,  became  our  Saviour  by 
being  born  on  this  day.  He  was  born  for  us  in  this  ever-changing 
state,  in  order  to  bring  us  to  the  eternal  Father.  God  became  man, 
that  man  might  become  God,  and,  that  man  might  eat  angels’  food, 
the  Lord  of  angels  became  man.”  And  also  S.  Gregory  Nazianzen 
(in  Distiches).  S.  Clemens  Alex,  says  that  by  His  Incarnation  He 
changed  earth  into  heaven,  and  made  angels,  and  even  gods,  of  men. 
(And  so  too  [Pseudo]-Origen,  Horn.  ix.  in  diversis ; S.  Leontius, 
Serm.  vi.  de  Nat. ; and  S.  Anselm,  Cur.  Deus  Homo.) 

See  then  the  immensity  of  this  blessing.  God  not  only  rains 
down  manna,  but  rends  the  heavens  as  it  were,  and  showers  all 
the  treasures  and  compassions  of  the  Godhead  upon  us.  (See  Isa. 
xlv.  8.)  And  S.  Augustine,  Serm.  xxvii.  (nunc  clxxxvii.):  “ My  mouth 
shall  speak  the  praise  of  the  Lord,  the  Lord  by  whom  all  things 
were  made,  the  Revealer  of  His  Father,  the  Maker  of  His  Mother, 
the  Son  of  God — of  His  Father  without  a mother;  the  Son  of  Man — 


Digitized  by 


Google 


336  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  I. 


of  His  mother  without  a father ; the  Word  of  God  before  all  times, 
made  man  at  the  fitting  time.  . . . Great  in  the  form  of  God,  little 
in  the  form  of  a servant  . . . And  yet  not  so  as  to  detract  ought 
from  His  greatness,  or  that  His  littleness  should  be  overwhelmed  by 
His  greatness,”  &c.  And  S.  Gregory  Nazianzen  thus  rejoices  (Orat. 
xxx.  7) : “ Christ  is  bom : glorify  Him ; Christ  has  come  down  from 
heaven : go  forth  to  meet  Him.  . . . Clap  your  hands  together,  all 
ye  people,  for  unto  us  a Child  is  born,  unto  us  a Son  is  given.  . . . 
He  who  is  without  flesh  is  incarnate,  the  Word  increases  in  stature, 
the  invisible  is  seen,  the  intangible  is  touched,  He  who  is  without 
time  begins  to  be  the  Son  of  God — is  made  the  Son  of  man.  Jesus 
Christ,  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.”  See  S.  Bernard 
(Serm.  i.  de  Epiphany) : “What  could  declare  His  mercy  so  much  as 
His  taking  on  Him  our  misery?  ...  for  the  more  He  humbled 
Himself  in  His  humanity,  the  more  did  He  exhibit  His  goodness ; 
and  the  viler  He  became  for  me,  the  dearer  did  He  become  to  me.” 
And  (Serm.  lxiv.  in  Cant.),  " O the  sweetness,  the  grace  ! O the 
power  of  love  ! The  highest  of  all  has  become  the  lowest  of  all. 
And  who  effected  this  ? Love  ignoring  dignity,  great  in  condescen- 
sion, mighty  in  its  affections,  powerful  in  persuasion.  And  what 
mighty  violence ! love  triumphs  over  God,  to  teach  us  that  it  was 
of  His  love  that  His  fulness  was  poured  forth,  His  height  brought 
down,  and  His  one  nature  associated  with  another.” 

Let  us  then  open  our  heart  wide  to  receive  this  manna  pouring 
down  from  heaven,  that  so  by  our  boundless  desires  we  may  embrace 
and  taste  all  its  sweetness.  Let  us  imitate  the  Patriarchs,  who 
waited  four  thousand  years,  and  longed  and  thirsted  for  it,  saying, 
“ O that  thou  wouldest  rend  the  heavens  and  come  down  ! ” 

Let  us  imitate  the  Blessed  Virgin,  who  after  His  conception 
longed  for  His  birth,  was  torn  away  from  the  world,  and  wholly 
united  to  Christ  Let  every  one  make  known  to  Christ  his  necessities, 
and  that  temptation  which  specially  weighs  him  down,  and  say  con- 
fidently with  S.  Catherine  of  Sienna,  “ O Lord,  I have  Thee  present : 
Thou  art  mine,  I will  not  let  Thee  go  till  Thou  removest  this 
temptation ; grant  me  this  virtue  or  grace,  till  Thou  entirely  possessest 


Digitized  by* 


joogle 


THE  INCARNATION  OF  CHRIST. 


33 ; 


my  heart,  and  imbuest  it  with  Thy  love.”  For  He  came  on  earth 
for  this  very  purpose.  S.  Jerome  and  S.  Paula  went  to  Bethlehem, 
that  they  might  continually  behold  in  their  minds  the  birth  of 
Christ  So  S.  Francis  just  before  his  death  celebrated  Christmas 
with  an  ox  and  ass,  ever  repeating,  “Let  us  love  the  Babe  of 
Bethlehem.”  And  S.  Bernard  on  this  mystery  surpasses  himself,  as 
he  preached,  saying,  “ Christ  gave  Himself  wholly  for  thee  : do  thou 
give  thyself  wholly  to  Him ; as  He  became  man  for  thee,  do  thou 
in  return  be  bom  to  Christ — engraft  thyself  with  the  Word,  betroth 
and  give  thyself  wholly  to  God.”  See  also  Serm.  in  Cana  Dom . at 
end  of  his  works. 

And  our  hands  have  handled  of  the  word  of  life.  That  is,  that  Very 
Word  which  we  have  handled,  seen,  and  heard.  That  which  we 
could  handle  and  touch,  His  humanity,  e.g.,  and  thus  have  found 
that  He  truly  assumed  human  flesh,  and  was  not  a phantom  or 
spectre.  Happy  they  who  were  permitted  thus  to  see,  hear,  and 
touch  the  Incarnate  Word.  See  Luke  x.  23. 

Didymus  refers  all  this  to  the  Resurrection,  a mystery  which  the 
Apostles  constantly  confirm  and  enforce.  The  Gloss  confines  it 
to  the  Transfiguration.  But  it  is  far  better  to  refer  it  to  the 
whole  economy  of  the  Incarnation  of  the  Word  of  lifey  that  is,  the 
eternal,  uncreated,  Divine  Word.  S.  Basil  thinks  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  may  be  called  the  Word.  But,  as  S.  Thomas  says,  in  an 
improper  sense.  See  notes  on  John  i.  1. 

But  it  may  be  asked,  (1.)  why  does  S.  John  call  the  Son,  the 
Word  ? 1 st,  Because  both  in  his  Gospel  and  Epistle  he  refers  to 
that  beginning  which  Moses  speaks  of.  2d,  Because  the  Word  Who 
is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father  has  all  wisdom.  And  this  wisdom  S. 
John  sets  forth,  dwelling  more  on  Christ’s  teaching  and  doctrine, 
while  the  other  evangelists  dwell  more  on  what  He  did  He  there- 
fore calls  Christ  the  Word,  because  he  purposes  to  recount  the  say- 
ings of  this  “Word.”  3d,  If  he  had  called  Him  the  Son,  they 
might  have  imagined  Him  to  be  of  a bodily  and  passible  nature. 
But  the  “ Word  ” signifies  that  His  generation  was  not  human  but 

spiritual  and  divine,  and  consequently  pure,  perfect,  and  incorruptible, 

vol.  v.  Y 


Digitized  by 


338  FIRST  ERISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  I. 

generated  by  the  Divine  mind  as  a word  is  generated  in  our  mind. 
4th,  Because  the  “ Word  **  signifies  the  mental  conception  of  God 
the  Father,  and  this  is  the  generation  of  the  Son,  who  represents 
and  sets  forth  the  wisdom  and  will  of  the  Father,  as  a word  would 
do.  And  this  too  is  the  very  reason  why  the  Son,  and  not  the 
Father  or  the  Holy  Spirit,  was  incarnate,  because  the  Incarnation 
took  place  in  order  to  manifest  God  to  man.  But  it  is  by  a word 
that  anything  is  manifested.  And  as  the  Word  was  begotten  of  the 
Father  in  the  Spirit,  so  did  it  become  Him  to  be  bom  of  His  mother 
in  the  flesh.  S.  John  therefore  leads  us  to  the  Word,  and  through 
Him  to  God,  in  order  to  teach  us  ever  to  hold  sweet  converse  with 
Him.  As  Seneca  says,  “ As  the  rays  of  the  sun  reach  the  earth, 
but  dwell  in  their  own  source,  so  does  a noble  soul,  which  is  sent 
among  us  to  bring  a closer  knowledge  of  divine  things,  hold  con- 
verse indeed  with  us,  but  is  not  separated  from  its  own  source.,, 
It  is  wedded  to  the  eternal  word,  as  S.  Ambrose  says  and  S.  Augus- 
tine {Serm.  xxxviii.  nunc  Serm . cxvii.),  “ A man  becomes  happy  by 
attaining  to  that  which  ever  continues  happy,  and  is  itself  perpetual 
happiness,  and  that  by  which  man  lives  is  perpetual  life,  that  by 
which  he  becomes  wise  is  perpetual  wisdom,  and  that  by  which  he  is 
enlightened  is  perpetual  light.” 

2d.  But  why  is  the  Son  called  Aoyo;  ? (1.)  That  word  can  be  trans- 
lated ‘ wisdom/  And  just  as  wisdom  is  intimately  connected  with 
ourselves,  so  is  the  Son  with  the  Father.  And  (2.)  as  reason  or 
knowledge  proceeds  from  the  mind,  so  does  the  Word  or  the  Son 
proceed  from  the  Father.  So  Origen,  S.  Chrysostom,  Theophylact, 
Euthymius  in  John  i.,  Nazianzen,  Orat . iv.,  S.  Basil,  &c.  And  (3.)  be- 
cause He  makes  us  subject  to  reason.  See  Rupertus  on  John  i.,  and 
Eusebius,  Demetrius,  Evang.  v.  5.  “ The  Word  has  in  Himself  the 

reasons  of  all  created  things,  and  is  accordingly  termed  the  Wisdom 
and  the  Word  of  God.”  But  this  word  ‘reason*  does  not  express 
so  clearly  His  procession  from  the  Father.  (See  S.  Augustine,  Quasi. 
lxiii.  inter  lxxxvii.)  Besides  which  the  word  ‘reason*  speaks  of 
the  Essence  of  God  and  is  common  to  the  Whole  Trinity,  and  is  not 
merely  personal  as  [PseudoJ-Dionysius  says  {Be  Divinis  Nominibus ). 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


339 


MEANING  OF  “ THE  WORD.” 

But  lastly,  * reason1  can  exist  in  one  who  at  the  time  does  not 
understand  (as  when  sleeping),  but  the  ‘Word’  only  in  one  who 
actually  understands 

2d.  The  word  may  mean  ‘work/  For  the  Word  is  the 
coequal  work  of  the  Father  as  God.  See  Wisd.  vii.  25. 

3d.  It  may  mean  * power/  For  the  Word  is  the  arm  of  the  Father, 
by  which  He  created  all  things  (as  God),  and  by  whom  He  redeemed 
all  things.  (See  1 Cor.  i.  23.) 

4th.  It  may  mean  ‘ the  form/  For  the  Word  is  the  brightness  of 
the  Eternal  Light.  Wisd.  vii.  26  ; Heb.  i.  23.  [Pseudo]-Dionysius 
speaks  of  the  Father  as  the  primordial  Fount  of  Godhead,  and  the 
Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost  as  shoots  (so  to  speak)  of  Godhead.  And 
accordingly  S.  Augustine  (de  Trin . vi.  10)  says,  “ A certain  person 
(S.  Hilary,  de  Synod)  says  that  when  he  wished  to  express  in  the 
clearest  manner  the  properties  of  the  several  Persons  in  the  Trinity, 
he  used  to  say  that  * Eternity  was  in  the  Father,  His  Image  in  the 
Son,  His  use  in  the  gift,  t.e.  the  Holy  Spirit  the  gift  of  the  Father 
and  the  Son/  ” And  (as  above)  “ The  Word  increases  not  as  we  know 
Him,  but  ever  remains  one  and  the  same,  whether  we  adhere  to  or 
withdraw  from  Him,  ever  abiding  in  Himself,  and  renewing  all 
things.  The  Form  (or  pattern)  of  all  things,  unfashioned  Himself, 
independent  of  time  and  space.” 

5th,  It  can  mean  ‘definition/  because  He  definitely  and  fully  sets 
forth  the  nature  of  the  Father,  and  of  all  things  besides.  As  S. 
Gregory  Nazianzen  says,  “The  Son  has  the  same  relation  to  the  Father 
as  the  definition  to  the  thing  defined.  For  he  who  sees  the  Son,  sees 
the  Father : for  the  Son  is  a brief  and  simple  setting  forth  of  the 
Father’s  nature.”  See  Euthymius  on  John  i.  Again,  it  may  mean 
‘ a computation ; ’ for  the  Word  is  the  standard  by  which  all  things 
are  computed, 

6th.  Again,  it  may  mean  the  ‘ ca use,’  for  the  Word  was  both  the 
efficient  cause  of  all  creatures,  and  also  the  idea  which  conceived 
them. 

7th.  Beza  and  others  suppose  it  to  be  the  promised  Word,  foretold 
by  the  Prophets.  But  Salmeron  states  in  reply,  that  He  was  before 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


340  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  I. 

all  Prophets,  and  was  with  God.  In  fact,  Beza  denies  the  XoyoQ 
quite  as  much  as  do  the  Alogians  (see  Epiph.  Hcer.  li.),  as  do  also 
the  Magdeburg  Centuriators,  and  thus  are  semi-atheists. 

8th.  But  the  best  meaning  is  that  He  is  the  ‘Word/  not  of  the 
mouth  and  voice,  but  of  the  heart  and  mind.  For  as  we  conceive 
anything  in  our  mind,  so  did  the  Eternal  Father,  knowing  what  was 
His  own  Essence  and  all  its  capacities,  form  and  produce  this  Word 
from  eternity  in  every  respect  equal  and  like  to  Himself,  and  con- 
sequently God,  the  Son  of  God,  begotten  of  the  Father.  (See  Suarez, 
lib.  ix.  de  Deo  Trin.  cap.  4,  6,  and  others.) 

Here  note  that  the  Word  of  God  has  a twofold  sense,  first,  essential , 
because  He  is  the  very  essence,  mind,  and  will  of  the  Father  which 
He  communicates  to  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit  The  Arians 
believed  this,  but  added  that  God  began  to  be  the  Father  only  in 
time.  (2.)  There  is  the  personal  sense  of  the  word,  viz.  the  Word  be- 
gotten of  the  Father,  and  a Person  subsisting  by  Himself.  Of  Him 
S.  John  speaks  both  here  and  in  his  Gospel.  S.  Cyril  ( Thtsaur . 
vii.  1)  says,  “S.  John  chose  the  name  of  the  ‘Word’  as  most 
appropriate,  and  significative  of  the  Godhead,  and  the  procession  of 
the  second  Person  of  the  Trinity.”  But  S.  Augustine  (de  Trin.  xv. 
14),  “the  Father  knoweth  all  things  in  Himself — in  Himself  essen- 
tially, but  in  the  Son  as  His  Word.” 

The  word  Xoyog  is  the  same  as  discourse , or  speech.  Accordingly, 
Tertullian,  S.  Cyprian,  S.  Ambrose,  Jerome,  use  the  word  1 Sermo! 
Erasmus  adopted  this  in  the  passage  before  us.  For  this  innovation 
he  was  sharply  handled  by  theologians,  but  defended  by  Calvin. 

. The  term  ‘ word  * (verbum)  is  more  appropriate — (1.)  as  the  sim- 
plest; (2.)  the  most  general  term  ; (3.)  because  it  is  the  proper  word 
for  any  mental  conception,  and  the  Son  is  the  conception  of  the 
Father’s  mind  ; (4.)  a word  is  uttered  by  the  mouth,  and  so  did  the 
Father  make  known  His  will  through  the  Word,  as  S.  Epiphanius 
expressly  says  (Hcer.  lxxi.),  and  S.  Augustine  (de  Fide  et  Symb . 
cap . iii.),  " He  is  called  the  Word  of  the  Father,  because  the  Father 
is  made  known  through  Him.  For  just  as  we  by  our  words  make 
our  mind  known  to  a hearer,  so  is  that  Wisdom,  whom  the  Father 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


ATTRIBUTES  OF  “ THE  WORD.” 


341 


begat,  most  fittingly  called  the  Word,  because  it  is  through  Him  that 
the  very  secrets  of  the  Father  are  made  known.”  S.  John  here  and 
elsewhere  calls  Christ  the  Word  by  reason  of  His  Godhead  and  not 
His  manhood. 

S.  Basil,  describing  the  dignity  and  attributes  of  the  Word  (lib.  ii. 
contr . Eunom.\  says,  “ In  order  to  have  a worthy  understanding  of 
His  generation  from  God,  we  should  consider  it  to  be  impassible, 
indivisible,  before  all  time,  like  a ray  shooting  forth  from  a light,  not 
carefully  wrought  out  at  some  subsequent  time,  but  as  existing 
together  with  its  prototype,  which  gave  it  its  being,  and  coexisting 
with  it,  like  the  impression  of  a seal,  or  as  when  teachers  impart 
knowledge,  without  losing  anything  themselves,  and  yet  instructing 
their  hearers.”  And  Tertullian  (adv.  Pr ax  earn,  ch.  ix.)  uses  the  same 
comparisons.  “ God  brought  forth  His  Word,  as  a root  produces  a 
plant,  a fountain  the  river,  and  the  sun  its  rays.  But  yet  we  cannot 
separate  them  from  each  other,  as  the  Word  cannot  be  separated 
from  God.”  This  doctrine  is  fully  set  forth  in  the  Creed  which  S. 
Gregory  Thaumaturgus  is  said  to  have  received  from  S.  John  himself, 
at  the  bidding  of  the  Blessed  Virgin.  The  Gentiles  knew  this  truth 
in  a shadowy  way,  having  learned  it  either  from  the  Old  Testament 
or  from  the  Sibylline  Books,  or  even  from  the  light  of  nature,  or 
Divine  Inspiration.  Plato  accordingly  was  called  the  Attic  Moses, 
(Eusebius,  de  Prep . Evan.  xiii. ; and  Theodoret,  de  Curando  Grcec. 
Affect,  lib.  ii.),  Lactantius  (de  Sap.  iv.  9)  says,  “Philosophers  were 
not  ignorant  of  this  divine  Word.  For  Zeno  calls  the  Orderer  of 
Nature  and  the  Maker  of  the  Universe  the  \6yos.” 

But  it  will  be  asked,  was  this  Divine  Word  like  our  Word,  or  un- 
like ? Partly  like,  and  partly  unlike.  It  was  like  in  these  respects : 
1.  As  being  immaterial.  2.  As  being  in  either  case  the  vehicle  of  our 
thoughts;  and  3,  of  our  conceptions.  4.  As  being  within.  5.  As  being 
the  idea  according  to  which  nations  are  moulded.  Hence  Tinneus 
calls  the  Word  of  God  his  pattern  world,  the  model  of  all  created 
things.  6.  As  the  thoughts  of  our  mind  are  uttered  outwardly  in 
word,  so  was  it  when  the  Word  of  God  spake  in  the  Flesh  He 
assumed.  7.  As  our  word  is  the  image  of  our  understanding,  so  is 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


342  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  I. 

the  Word  the  image  of  God  the  Father.  8.  As  our  word  or  con- 
ception lasts  as  long  as  we  understand  any  matter,  so  is  it  with  the 
Divine  Word.  The  Divine  mind  ever  abides,  so  does  His  Word. 
And  as  the  mind  of  the  Father  is  ever  active,  so  is  it  with  the  gene- 
ration of  the  Word.  It  is  ever  going  on.  As  the  Ephesian  fathers 
say,  “ Let  the  splendour  of  light  set  forth  that  the  Son  of  God  has 
ever  been  coetemai  with  the  Father,  let  the  ‘ Word  * declare  that 
His  generation  was  without  suffering,  and  let  the  Name  of  Son  reveal 
His  consubstantiality.”  See,  too,  S.  Basil  (Horn,  i.  on  S.  John). 
9.  As  the  conceptions  of  our  mind  precede  our  action.  As  S.  Augus- 
tine says  (de  Trinit . lib.  xv.  11),  “There are  no  acts  of  ours  which  are 
not  previously  suggested  in  the  mind.  There  may  be  words  of  ours 
which  are  not  followed  by  action,  but  the  contrary  cannot  be : and 
in  like  manner  the  Word  of  God  could  be  when  as  yet  no  creature 
existed,  but  no  creature  could  exist  except  by  Him  by  Whom  all 
things  were  made.” 

II.  It  is  unlike : (1.)  Because  our  word  is  merely  an  accident  of 
our  mind  : but  the  Word  of  God  exists  as  a Substance  and  a Person. 
See  S.  Athanasius,  Serm.  i.  contr.  Arianos ; and  S.  Chrysostom, 
Horn.  i.  on  John  ix.  2.  (2.)  Our  word  is  a thing  of  time,  subsequent 
to  its  conception  in  the  mind,  whereas  the  Word  of  God  is  from  ail 
eternity,  and  coeual  with  the  Father.  And  again  our  ( word ' results 
from  our  being  unable  otherwise  to  understand  others.  But  the 
Word  of  God  arises  from  the  infinite  perfection  and  productiveness 
of  the  Father’s  mind.  (3.)  Our  speech  is  imperfect,  ever  changing, 
and  complex.  Whereas  the  Word  of  God  is  perfect,  ever  constant, 
unchangeable,  one  and  the  same,  as  S.  Augustine  says  (on  Ps.  xliv.), 
“ All  things  exist  in  One,”  and  S.  Athanasius,  Serm.  iii.  contr.  Arian. 
(4.)  Our  word  or  speech  is  distinct  from  our  mind,  whereas  the 
Word  of  God  is  consubstantial  with  the  Father.  (5.)  Our  speech 
(or  word)  is  part  of  our  nature,  but  the  Word  of  God  is  a Person 
distinct  from  the  Father.  (6.)  Our  word  is  not  our  son,  whereas 
the  Word  of  God  is  the  Son  of  God,  as  S.  Augustine  says  (de  Trinit. 
vL  1):  “The  Father  is  Very  Wisdom,  but  the  Son  is  Wisdom  and 
Power  from  the  Wisdom  and  Power  of  the  Father.  The  Father  is 


Digitized  by  1^.00  ;Le 


OPINIONS  OF  THE  FATHERS. 


343 


not  wise  by  engendered  Wisdom,  but  is  in  Himself  unbegotten 
Wisdom.”  (7.)  Our  words  are  feeble  and  ineffectual;  the  Word  of  God 
is  all-powerful.  (8.)  Our  words  soon  pass  away  and  come  to  naught. 
The  Word  of  God  is  eternal,  for  eternal  is  the  understanding  and  the 
generation  of  the  Father.  S.  Hilary  says  (de  Trinit  ii.),  “The 
sound  of  the  voice  ceases,  and  the  expression  of  our  thought.  But 
this  Word  is  a reality,  not  a mere  sound.”  (See  Suarez  ut  supra, .) 

And  therefore,  though  we  may  in  some  measure  ascend  from  the 
word  of  our  mind  to  (the  knowledge  of)  the  Word  of  God,  yet  this 
ascent  by  the  light  of  nature  is  only  to  (the  knowledge  of)  His 
essential  Word.  For  this  God  conceives,  understands,  and 
bringeth  forth  all  things.  But  that  He  brought  forth  and  begat 
His  Personal  Word,  that  is  as  Son,  surpasses  the  understanding 
both  of  angels  and  men.  It  must  therefore  be  wondered  at 

and  adored  in  mute  and  holy  silence,  rather  than  be  pried 
into  and  set  forth  by  our  too  curious  and  yet  feeble  under- 
standing, so  that  we  may  wonder  and  cry  aloud  with  the  Seraphim, 
* Holy,  Holy,  Holy/  &c.  This  was  not  known  to  Plato,  or  to 
Demosthenes  with  all  his  eloquence.  “ I will  bring  to  nought  the 

understanding  of  the  prudent,”  says  S.  Jerome  to  Paulinus.  “ My 
heart  hath  uttered  a good  word.  I will  speak  of  thy  works  to  the 
King,”  says  the  Psalmist  (Ps.  xlv.  i.)  “Thou  seest  that  this  Word 
is  the  Son  of  God,  and  we  believe  that  He  came  forth  from  the 
Father's  breast ; from  the  womb  of  His  heart,  so  to  speak.”  (Nazian- 
zen,  Orat.  de  Fide.)  See  Ps.  cx.,  on  which  S.  Jerome  says,  “He 
brought  Him  forth  from  His  own  Nature,  from  His  own  substance, 
from  the  very  inmost  being  ( medullis ) of  His  Godhead.  Whatever 
the  Father  is  Himself  in  His  Godhead  He  gave  wholly  to  His  Son.” 

Tropologically . S.  Augustine  ( Confess . xi.  9)  explains  how  the 

Word  preaches  to  the  heart  of  man,  and  S.  Bernard  says  (Serm.  xlv. 
in  Cant) : “ His  beauty  is  His  love,  and  it  is  the  greater  because  it 
takes  the  lead.  But  then  it  is,  that  from  the  very  depths  of  His 
heart,  and  from  His  inmost  affections,  He  cries  more  ardently  for 
our  love  in  return,  in  proportion  as  He  feels  that  He  was  more  ready 
to  love  us  than  we  were  to  be  loved  by  Him.  And  hence  arose  His 


Digitized  by 


Google 


344  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  I. 

speaking  to  us,  His  pouring  forth  His  gift,  and  the  response  of  the 
soul,  its  wonder  and  its  thankfulness.  And  it  therefore  loves  the 
more,  because  it  sees  that  it  is  mastered  in  love,  and  wonders  the 
more,  and  feels  that  it  was  not  the  first  to  love.”  And  S.  Ambrose, 
( de  Virg.  iii.)  says,  “ the  Word  of  God  wounds,  but  leaves  not  a sore 
{ulcerat)”  There  is  a wound  of  gracious  love,  there  are  wounds  of 
charity,  as  the  Spouse  says  ( Cant.  //.),  “She  who  is  perfect  is 
wounded,  with  charity.  Good  then  are  the  wounds  of  the  Word — the 
wounds  of  Him  who  loveth  us.” 

The  word  of  life.  “ For  as  the  Father  hath  life  in  Himself,  &c.” 
(John  v.  26.)  Being  is  here  attributed  to  the  Father,  life  to  the 
Word,  love  to  the  Holy  Spirit 

Life  is  threefold,  divine,  angelic,  human.  Of  these  the  Divine  is 
most  perfect,  boundless,  eternal,  uncreated,  the  origin  and  source  of 
angelic  and  human  life.  Angelic  life  is  created,  but  spiritual 
Human  life  is  partly  spiritual,  partly  corporeal.  It  is  also  natural 
and  supernatural.  The  natural  consists  in  life,  sense,  and  reason. 
The  supernatural  also  is  two-fold,  begun  by  grace  and  consummated 
in  glory.  Further  than  this  the  Divine  Life  is  formal  and  causal 
Formal  is  that  life  with  which  God  Himself  exists,  causal  that  by 
which  He  gives  life  (whether  natural  or  spiritual)  to  others.  The 
Word  then  is  called  the  Word  of  Life,  as  having  life  in  Himself  and 
as  being  the  cause  of  life  to  others.  As  S.  John  says,  “in  Him  was 
life,”  being  in  Himself  essential  life.  See  S.  Thomas,  par.  i.  Qucest. 
28,  where  he  alludes  to  the  words  (Ps.  xxxvi.),  “ With  Thee  is  the 
Fount  of  Life;”  as  Theodoret  says,  “With  Thee  is  the  Eternal 
Word,  the  Fount  of  Life,  and  in  the  Light  of  the  Holy  Spirit  we 
shall  see  the  light  of  the  only  Begotten  One.” 

But  secondly,  it  may  mean,  that  in  the  Word  there  exist,  as  in 
archetype,  the  eternal  reasons  of  all  things.  “ The  Wisdom  of  God, 
(says  S.  Augustine  in  John  i.  1)  in  art  (or  theory)  contains  all  things. 
Thou  beholdest  the  heaven,  sun,  moon,  they  exist  in  the  theory ; 
outwardly  they  are  bodies,  in  theory  they  are  life.”  And  again, 
“ All  things  which  are  made,  and  have  not  life,  have  life  in  the  Word 
of  God,  though  they  are  not  life  in  themselves.”  The  same  statement 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  WORD”  OUR  TRUE  LIFE. 


345 


occurs  in  the  Homilies  ascribed  to  Origen.  As  Philo  says,  " When 
He  resolved  to  create  this  world,  He  formed  a conception  of  it, 
and  from  that  fashioned  the  world  we  now  see.9*  See  note  in  trans- 
lation of  S.  Augustine  (on  John  i.  3)  in  Library  of  the  Fathers. 

But  again,  in  Him  is  that  which  sustains  and  supports  everything 
in  life.  See  S.  Chrysostom,  Cyril,  Theophylact,  Euthymius  in  John 
i.  4,  and  Clement  Alex.  Adhort.  ad  gentes. 

Thirdly,  But  it  is  best  to  understand  it  to  mean  that  in  the  Word  is 
our  true  life,  both  of  grace  and  glory.  He  became  man  in  order  to 
communicate  this  life  and  light  to  men : that,  just  as  the  world  at 
large  was  created  by  Him,  so  might  man  (this  existence  of  the  world) 
be  re-created,  and  brought  back  from  sin  to  the  life  of  grace  and 
glory.  See  below,  verse  2,  and  chapter  v.  ii.  See  S.  Chrysostom, 
Augustine,  S.  Ambrose,  de  Fidef  cap . iii.  and  others.  See  too 
the  many  passages  in  this  Gospel  where  life  is  spoken  of  as  coming 
from  the  Word.  See  also  Lactantius  i.  11,  on  the  meaning  of  ZsDc. 

And  the  Life  was  manifested : By  the  Incarnation,  by  which  He 
was  beheld  and  even  touched  by  men.  This  was  prophesied  by 
Isaiah ; and  see  Luke  iii.  5.  And  S.  Ambrose  in  Ps.  xxxvi.  (xxxvii.) 
19  says,  “Christ  is  in  all  things  our  life.  His  Godhead  is  our  life. 
His  eternity  is  our  life,  His  flesh  is  our  life,  His  Passion  is  our  life.” 
Whence  Jeremy  says,  “ We  shall  live  in  His  shadow,  the  shadow  of 
His  wings.  The  shadow  of  the  cross  is  the  shadow  of  His  Passion, 
His  death  is  life,  His  wounds  are  life,  His  blood  is  life,  His  burial 
is  life,  His  Resurrection  is  the  life  of  all  men.  Wishest  thou  to  know 
how  His  death  is  life  ? We  are  baptized  into  His  death,  that  we 
may  walk  with  Him  in  newness  of  life  [Rom.  vi.  4].  And  He  says 
Himself,  “ Except  a com  of  wheat  fall  into  the  ground  and  die,  it 
abideth  alone,  but  if  it  die,  it  bringeth  forth  much  fruit  (John  xii.  24). 
He,  that  grain  of  wheat,  was  separated  from  the  body  for  us,  and 
died  that  He  might  bring  forth  much  fruit  in  us.  His  death  there- 
fore  is  the  fruit  of  life.” 

And  bear  witness.  In  our  words,  our  life,  our  suffering  death  and 
martyrdom.  As  S.  John  says  of  himself  (Rev.  v.  1.)  Again,  it 
means,  “ We  protest  and  denounce,  by  threatening  unbelievers  with 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


346  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  I. 

the  terrible  judgment  of  God.”  As  Cassian  says  ( de  Incarn.  v.  6), 
“ In  faithfully  discharging  His  office,  He  leaves  those  who  refuse  to 
listen,  to  bear  the  peril  of  their  own  disobedience.” 

And  shew  unto  you  that  Eternal  Life ; Christ,  who  as  the  Word  of 
God  is  eternal  life:  which  was  with  the  Father , and  was  manifested 
unto  us — being  made  visible  by  His  Incarnation,  miracles,  especially 
(says  Cajetan)  by  His  Transfiguration,  Resurrection,  and  Ascension. 
By  which  latter  He  shows  that  not  only  as  the  Word,  but  as  man 
also,  He  will  live  a glorious  and  eternal  life. 

With  the  Father . As  the  Gospel  says,  “ The  Word  was  with  God.” 
Being,  as  Nonnus  says,  “never  parted  from  the  Father:  ever 
seated  on  His  Throne.” 

S.  John  here  answers  the  objection,  “ How  could  He  be  ever  with 
the  Father,  when  there  was  no  place  where  He  could  be  ? S.  John 
replies  that  there  was  no  need  of  space  for  Him.  He  was  in  the 
bosom  of  the  Father.  But  the  word  * with  ’ signifies  three  things  : 
(i)  That  He  was  a person  distinct  from  the  Father,  (2)  that  He 
was  closely  connected  with  Him,  (3)  was  equal  to  the  Father. 
This  overthrows  the  Eunoraian  heresy  that  the  Son  was  not  the 
Word,  for  S.  John  says  that  it  was  the  same  Word  which  was  with 
the  Father,  and  was  manifested  in  the  flesh.  And  to  keep  them 
from  inferring  that  the  Word  was  not  God,  S.  John  expressly  adds, 
“And  the  Word  was  God.”  For  the  Divine  Persons, though  distinct 
the  one  from  the  other,  have  yet  one  and  the  same  Essence.  And 
that  the  Word  was  not,  as  Arian  suggested,  separable  from  the 
Father,  as  some  article  of  dress  (see  S.  Fulgent,  contr.  Monimum , 
lib . iii.  cap . 2,  3),  He  is  one  with  the  Father  as  heat  and  bright- 
ness co-exist  in  the  fire,  or  as  memory  and  understanding  co-exist 
in  the  same  mind,  or  perhaps  intellect,  memory,  and  will  are  identical 
with  the  mind  itself. 

And  was  manifested  unto  us.  This  was  at  the  Incarnation  (as 
S.  Dionysius  Alex,  says),  where  the  invisible  became  visible,  and 
when  He  who  far  surpasses  every  being  came  from  the  hidden 
shrine  of  Godhead,  became  man,  and  stood  forth  to  our  view.  But 
God  in  truth  is  hidden  even  after  this  manifestation  of  Himself,  or 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


OUR  FELLOWSHIP  WITH  CHRIST. 


347 


indeed  (to  announce  a higher  truth)  even  in  this  very  manifestation. 
For  the  Godhead  of  Jesus  was  hidden,  and  the  mystery  which  then  was 
wrought  respecting  Him  is  not  revealed  or  brought  into  light  by  any- 
thing which  can  be  said  or  thought  about  Him,  but  even  when  it  is 
spoken  of  cannot  be  explained,  and  when  it  is  understood  is  still 
kept  secret 

Ver.  3. — That  ye  also  may  have  fellowship  with  us.  That  is,  in  the 
same  faith  and  Church  of  Christ,  where  all  partake  in  the  same  sacra- 
ments. It  means  also  that  ye  should  make  increase  and  advance  in 
the  faith.  It  signifies  a continuous  and  growing  act.  For  he  speaks 
to  the  faithful  who  already  belonged  to  this  society,  though  (Ecu- 
menius  thinks  it  refers  to  unbelievers,  whom  John  wished  to  attract 
to  the  Church  of  Christ.  This  is  what  S.  Paul  speaks  of  (Heb.  xiL 
22),  “ Ye  have  come  unto  Mount  Sion,”  &c.  For  with  all  these  we 
have  fellowship  in  the  Church — with  Angels,  with  the  Apostles,  with 
the  early  Christians,  with  just  men  made  perfect,  with  Christ  and 
with  God.  Whence  S.  John  adds, 

And  that  our  fellowship  may  be  with  the  Father , and  with  His  Son 
Jesus  Christ.  Not  with  the  god  of  Simon  Magus,  and  with  his 
mediating  angels,  whom  he  regards,  as  does  Plato  also,  as  demigods. 
For, as  Bede  says,  “No  one  can  have  fellowship  with  God,  unless 
he  be  first  joined  to  the  fellowship  of  the  Church.”  And  as  S. 
Cyprian  says  (de  Unit.  Ecclest'ai),  “ Whoever  is  separated  from  the 
Church  is  joined  to  an  adulteress.  He  is  severed  from  the  promises 
of  the  Church,  and  will  not  attain  to  the  rewards  which  Christ  offers. 
He  who  has  left  the  Church  of  Christ  is  an  alien,  is  profane,  is  an 
enemy.  He  cannot  have  God  as  his  Father,  who  hath  not  the 
Church  as  his  mother.  If  no  one  could  escape  who  was  without 
the  ark,  so  can  no  one  escape  who  is  without  the  Church,  &c.” 
Excommunicated  persons  then  who  are  separated  from  the  Church 
are  likewise  separated  from  God.  In  the  Greek  this  is  stated  more 
plainly  and  forcibly,  Our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father  and  with  His 
Son  Jesus  Christ.  It  sets  forth  the  nobleness  of  the  fellowship  of 
the  Church,  as  being  our  fellowship  with  God  and  Christ,  for  the 
Church  is  His  spouse.  (See  2 Pet.  i.  4 ; 1 Cor.  i.  9 and  vi.  7^) 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


348  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  I. 


All  the  faithful  then  have  fellowship  with  Christ  and  God  by  faith, 
hope,  and  charity,  and  the  more  so  as  they  advance  in  these  graces, 
imitate  His  life,  and  help  to  propagate  His  truth,  like  the  Apostles, 
who  did  and  suffered  so  much  for  Christ,  and  devoted  themselves 
entirely  to  promote  His  glory  and  the  salvation  of  souls.  This 
fellowship  or  society  embraces  all  the  qualifications  of  true  friend- 
ship which  Aristotle,  Cicero,  and  others  speak  of.  Accordingly  S. 
Augustine  {Tract,  lxxvL  on  John)  says,  “The  Holy  Spirit  with  the 
Father  and  the  Son  makes  His  abode  with  us  as  in  a temple.  The 
whole  three  Persons  come  to  us,  when  we  come  to  them : they  come 
by  succouring,  we  by  obeying ; they  by  enlightening,  we  by  behold- 
ing the  light ; they  by  filling  us,  we  by  receiving — so  that  our  sight  of 
them  is  not  outward,  but  inward,  and  their  dwelling  with  us  is  not 
transitory  but  eternal.”  Dionysius  the  Carthusian  beautifully  and 
piously  explains  {in  loc.)  how  the  faithful  should  hold  converse  with 
God.  Hesselius  and  Lorinus  'describe  our  fellowship  with  Christ  as 
that  of  a lord  with  his  servant,  a father  with  an  adopted  child,  of 
the  enlightener  and  the  enlightened,  the  justifier  and  the  justified, 
a ruler  and  subject,  a giver  and  receiver,  of  one  who  invokes  and  one 
who  hears,  of  one  who  bestows  gifts  and  one  who  returns  thanks,  of 
Him  who  blesses  and  he  who  is  blessed  ; so  that,  cleaving  to  God, 
we  may  be  one  with  Him,  and  walking  in  the  light  as  He  is  in  the 
light,  may  have  fellowship  with  Him.  It  is  (as  concerns  Christ’s 
human  nature)  like  the  relation  of  a master  and  his  scholars,  of  a 
Priest  and  those  for  whom  he  offers  sacrifice  and  intercedes,  of  one 
who  suffers  punishment  which  another  deserved,  and  one  who 
receives  a favour  which  he  did  not  deserve,  &c.  Scripture  explains 
it  under  the  type  of  a Shepherd  and  his  sheep,  the  head  and  the 
members,  of  food  and  its  eaters,  the  vine  and  the  branches,  and  so  on. 
We,  in  a word,  who  are  partakers  of  His  sufferings,  are  partakers  of 
His  consolations.  Christ  also  calls  us  His  friends,  brethren,  &c. 
He  says  that  His  God  is  our  God,  His  Father  and  our  Father. 
(See  Eph.  ii.  19 ; 1 John  iii.  1 ; 2 Cor.  xi.  2 ; Hos.  ii.  19.) 

And  these  things  write  we  that  ye  may  rejoice  in  the  fellowship  of 
the  Church  of  .Christ,  and  that  your  joy  may  be  full . Increase  daily 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  SOURCE  OF  TRUE  JOY. 


349 


more  and  more  (see  Phil.  ii.  2 ; John  xvii.  13.)  This  is  the  result 
of  a good  conscience  (2  Cor.  i.  12).  As  S.  Bernard  says  to  Pope 
Eugenius,  “What  is  more  precious,  what  more  calm,  and  what  freer 
from  care  than  a good  conscience  ? It  fears  not  losses,  it  fears  not 
reproaches,  it  fears  not  bodily  tortures,  for  it  is  exalted  rather  than 
cast  down  by  death  itself.”  And  so  too  Cicero,  Horace,  and  other 
heathen  writers.  The  Apostle  therefore  rightly  sets  forth  the  hope 
and  confidence  inspired  by  a pure  and  innocent  conscience.  For 
S.  Augustine  truly  said  [on  Ps.  xxxi.],  “ The  very  charity  of  a righteous 
man  gives  him  hope  of  a good  conscience,  for  a good  conscience 
inspires  hope ; for  just  as  an  evil  conscience  leads  to  utter  despair, 
so  does  a good  conscience  inspire  confident  hope.” 

The  joy  then  of  believers  is  real  and  solid.  Being  joy  in  the  Lord 
it  satisfies  and  fills  the  mind,  while  joy  in  worldly  delights,  wealth, 
and  honours,  does  but  excite  without  gratifying.  Hear  S.  Gregory 
(Horn,  xi.  in  Evang.\  “ Because  unending  lamentations  follow  after 
present  joys,  avoid  vain  joys  in  this  life  if  ye  dread  sorrow  in  the 
next.  For  no  one  can  both  rejoice  with  the  world  here,  and  reign 
with  Christ  hereafter.  Abstain  therefore  from  the  fleeting  pleasures 
of  temporal  delight,  subdue  the  desires  of  the  flesh.  And  if  any- 
thing charms  thy  mind  here,  let  it  shrivel  to  nothing  at  the  thought  of 
the  eternal  fire  ; and  whatever  makes  thee  merry  in  youth,  let  youth- 
ful discipline  check  and  restrain,  that  so  ye  may  more  easily  obtain 
eternal  joys,  by  fleeing  of  your  own  accord  from  those  which  are 
only  temporal.”  And  S.  Chrysostom  {Horn,  xviii.  ad populum ),  “ He 
that  rejoices  in  the  Lord  can  never  by  anything  accidental  be 
deprived  of  it  For  all  other  things  which  delight  us  are  subject  to 
change,  nor  can  they  afford  us  so  much  pleasure,  as  to  drive  away 
and  cast  a shade  over  the  sorrow  which  springs  from  other  causes. 
But  the  fear  of  God  is  firm  and  immovable,  and  is  the  source  of  so 
much  joy,  that  no  sense  of  other  evils  can  gain  hold  of  us.”  And 
S.  Augustine  ( Confess . x.  22)  distinguishes  between  true  and  false 
joy  by  saying,  “There  is  a joy  which  is  not  vouchsafed  to  the 
wicked,  but  to  those  who  freely  worship  Thee.  For  Thou  Thyself 
art  their  joy.  And  a happy  life  consists  in  rejoicing  in  Thee,  and 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


350  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  I. 


for  Thee.  There  is  no  other  joy  but  this,  and  they  who  think  that  there 
is  another,  follow  after  another  kind  of  joy,  and  not  the  true  one.” 

And  this  is  the  announcement.  That  is,  the  message  announced  : 
As  God  is  called  our  fear,  our  hope,  that  is  the  object  of  our  fear 
and  hope,  by  a metonymy. 

That  God  is  light , and  in  Him  is  no  darkness  at  all.  Referring  to 
John  i.  4.  The  Word  then  is  the  light  of  men,  by  which  they  are 
enlightened  through  faith,  hope,  and  charity.  For  it  is  spiritual  light 
which  is  here  spoken  of.  The  meaning  is,  that  our  life  consists  in  the 
enlightenment  of  the  Word,  whereby  men  are  enlightened  in  the 
knowledge  of  God  and  their  own  salvation.  And  this  was  the  reason 
why  the  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  manifested  to  men.  The  Word 
then  is  substantial  and  uncreated  light,  formally,  ideally,  and  as  the 
cause  of  all  light,  whether  corporeal  or  spiritual,  of  grace  and  of  glory. 
God,  accordingly,  is  said  to  be  clothed  with  light  (Ps.  civ.),  to  be 
the  Father  of  lights  (James  i.  17),  and  to  dwell  in  unapproachable 
light  (1  Tim.  vi.  16).  For  light  is  the  noblest  quality  of  matter,  setting 
forth  the  glory  and  gifts  of  God’s  illumination  and  grace.  There  are 
indeed  very  many  and  most  beautiful  resemblances  between  God  and 
light  For  the  quality  of  light  is  its  great  swiftness  and  its  efficacy, 
its  purity,  which  is  not  soiled  by  anything  it  comes  into  contact  with, 
bringing  with  it  warmth,  brightness,  and  gladness — making  everything 
visible,  giving  to  all  living  things  life  and  vigour.  Such  is  the  grace 
of  God.  Sin  is  the  opposite,  and  is  therefore  symbolised  by  darkness. 
S.  [PseudoJ-Dionysius  {Cosiest.  Hter.  cap . xv.)  gives  thirty-one  resem- 
blances between  light  and  the  grace  of  God.  And  S.  John  Damascene 
(de  Fide  ii.  11)  compares  the  Holy  Trinity  to  a parhelion,  in  which 
there  appear  to  be  three  suns,  though  in  reality  there  is  but  one. 
“He  says  the  Godhead  is  indivisible,  just  as  in  these  three  suns, 
inseparably  connected  together,  there  is  one  and  the  same  tempering 
and  blending  of  light.”  And  [Pseudo] -Dionysius  represents  the  Holy 
Trinity  by  three  lamps,  illuminating  a house  as  with  one  single  indis- 
tinguishable brightness.  And  the  light  of  the  Deity,  and  the  Trinity, 
bright  as  it  is  in  itself,  yet  is  obscure  darkness  to  us,  because  the  eyes 
of  our  mind  are  unable  to  gaze  steadily  on  so  brilliant  and  over- 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  LIGHT  OF  THE  WORLD. 


J?1 

powering  a light.  This  is  also  referred  to  by  [Pseudo]-Dionysius. 
The  Father  then  is  the  source  of  light ; the  Son,  light  proceeding 
directly  from  Him  with  equal  and  commensurate  brightness;  the 
Holy  Spirit,  as  a reflected  brightness,  proceeding  from  the  mutual 
and  reflected  love  of  the  Father  and  the  Son.  The  Gentiles  had 
some  shadowy  notion  of  this,  Parmenides  defining  God  as  a con- 
tinuous circle  of  light,  encompassing  heaven,  and  Democritus,  as 
mind  in  a fiery  circle. 

Christ,  as  God  and  the  Word,  is  the  formal  uncreated  light ; as  man, 
He  is  the  created  light,  because  He  is  full  of  wisdom,  grace,  and 
glory.  He  is  also  the  causal  light,  as  being  the  cause  of  all  grace 
and  glory  in  us.  As  S.  John  says,  “ He  is  the  light,  because  He 
enlightens  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world,”  and  that  not  as 
giving  them  the  light  of  reason  (as  Origen  and  S.  Cyril  suppose),  but 
rather  as  giving  them  the  supernatural  light  of  faith  and  wisdom. 
Malachi  terms  Him  the  Son  of  righteousness.  Manichgeus  was  wrong 
in  supposing  that  the  material  sun  was  Christ  (see  S.  Augustine, 
Tract . xxxiv.  on  S.  John).  Christ  specially  shone  forth  after  His 
Incarnation,  though  He  shone  as  a light  even  before  that,  as  the 
dawn  precedes  the  day.  See  S.  Augustine  (Tract,  i.  on  S.  John , and 
Tsa.  xlix.  6).  Christ  said  Himself,  44 1 am  the  Light  of  the  World.” 
And  Simeon  also,  Luke  ii.  32.  S.  Augustine  (Horn,  xliii.  inter  ? 
[nunc  cxxxv.])  says  beautifully,  “Christ  came  as  an  illuminator,  be- 
cause the  devil  had  blinded  men.  This  chiefest  Physician  com- 
pounded an  eye-salve  of  infinite  value  to  cure  the  blinded  eyes. 
How  healing  was  it,  compounded  of  the  Word  and  the  flesh.  But  the 
eyes  of  man  were  so  restored  and  enlightened,  as  to  be  equal  to  the 
eyes  of  angels,  and  to  behold  the  heavenly  glory  of  God  Himself.” 
This  light  He  imparted  to  the  faithful,  and  especially  to  apostolic 
men,  for  them  to  become  the  light  of  the  world  (see  Job  xxxviii. ; 
Ps.  lxxxix.)  And  as  He  said  to  His  apostles,  “ Ye  are  the  light  of 
the  world.”  So  John,  speaking  of  S.  John  the  Baptist,  and  so  S.  Paul 
writes  to  the  Ephesians,  v.  5. 

And  in  Him  is  no  darkness  at  ally  darkness  being  the  type  of 
ignorance  and  sin.  So  Didymus  and  CEcumenius,  who  quotes  Johni 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


352  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  I. 


5,  and  adds,  “ He  calls  our  sinful  flesh  darkness,  in  which  Christ  was 
born,  and  yet  was  not  partaker  of  sin.”  As  Moses,  David,  Habakkuk, 
and  S.  James  (i.  17)  say  of  God.  Our  actions,  however  they  shine, 
are  not  the  light.  But  the  Divine  Essence  is  light  It  was  said  of 
the  holiest  of  men,  “ He  was  not  that  Light ; ” but  of  the  Word  of 
God,  it  was  said,  “That  was  the  true  Light,”  &c.  And  S.  Gregory 
Nazianzen  (Oral  xl)  says,  “ God  is  that  highest  and  unapproachable 
Light,  which  cannot  be  conceived  in  the  mind,  or  expressed  in  words, 
enlightening  every  nature  which  is  endowed  with  reason,  in  matters 
intelligible  to  the  mind,  as  the  sun  does  in  objects  of  sense,  present- 
ing itself  more  clearly  to  our  comprehension,  the  more  carefully  we 
have  cleansed  our  minds  from  sin,  and  as  one  who  is  the  more  greatly 
loved,  the  more  we  contemplate  Him,  and  lastly,  as  one  who  is  better 
known  the  more  we  love  Him.” 

All  this  indicates  the  truth  of  John’s  words,  that  God  is  light 
perfectly  unblended  with  darkness,  and  that  light  of  the  understanding, 
which  enlightens  the  eyes  of  our  soul  to  discern  it,  by  withdrawing 
it  from  all  material  objects,  exciting  all  our  affections  to  desire  it, 
and  it  alone. 

This  corresponds  with  John  L 4 : “ The  light  shineth  in  darkness, 
and  the  darkness  comprehended  it  not.”  Of  which  S.  Gregory  Nyssen 
(Oral,  de  Nativ .)  remarks,  " His  purity  touched  our  filthiness,  but  was 
not  defiled.”  And  S.  Augustine  ( Epist . ad  Honorat)  says,  “The  Son 
of  God  is  not  absent  even  from  the  minds  of  the  ungodly,  though 
they  see  Him  not,  just  as  light  is  not  seen  when  presented  to  the  eyes 
of  the  blind.  But  the  light  of  the  Word  shines  in  the  darkness  of 
ungodly  men,  by  the  light  of  reason,  by  the  voices  of  created  beings, 
which  exclaim  that  there  is  a Creator  who  is  to  be  venerated  and 
loved,  by  the  law  of  nature  within  in  the  mind,  by  the  new  law,  by 
Scripture,  by  doctors  and  preachers,  holy  inspirations,”  &c. 

And  hence  S.  Augustine  {Tract,  ii.  in  John ) says,  “Sink  not  into  sin, 
and  that  sun  will  not  sink  to  thee.  If  thou  sinkest,  He  will  sink  to 
thee.” 

The  Gentiles  seem  to  have  seen  this  in  a shadowy  way.  See  S. 
Clement  Alex.,  Strom.  Lib . iv. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


DARKNESS  AND  SIN  SYNONYMOUS. 


353 


Ver.  6k — If  we  say  that  we  have  fellowship  with  Him , and  walk  in 
darkness , we  lie.  See  2 Cor.  vi.  14.  To  walk  in  darkness,  is  to  live 
in  sin,  to  add  sin  to  sin.  He  here  aims  at  the  Gnostics,  who,  like 
the  Lutherans  and  Calvinists,  think  that  they  are  predestinate,  and 
that  they  will  certainly  be  saved,  however  sinfully  they  may  live. 
And  so  too  the  Ebionites.  Here  observe  sins  are  called  darkness 
for  various  reasons.  (1.)  Darkness  is  a loss  of  light,  sin  is  a loss  of 
grace.  (2.)  Darkness  causes  us  to  stumble,  so  do  sins  cause  us  to 
stumble  in  the  way  of  holiness.  (3.)  Those  who  work  in  the  dark 
(owls)  hate  the  light,  so  do  sinners.  John  iii.  20.  (4.)  Sins  are  the 

work  of  the  prince  of  darkness.  (5.)  They  are  committed  in  the 
dark.  (6.)  Sins  arise  from  blindness  of  heart.  “ This  can  be  removed 
only  by  God,  who  enlightens  our  minds  ” (see  S.  Augustine,  contr. 
Tulian , lib,  v.)  This  darkness  is  a sin  and  the  punishment  of  sin. 
(7.)  Sins  darken  the  mind  more  and  more;  and  (8.)  they  lead  to 
everlasting  darkness,  and  are  called  the  shadow  of  death. 

We  lie9  and  do  not  the  truth.  The  truth  here  meant  is  not  mere 
speculative  truth,  but  truth  in  act  and  deed.  By  truth  we  mean  duty, 
and  he  who  merely  pretends  to  do  it,  is  merely  a masked  hypocrite. 
(See  Gregory  Nyssen,  Epist.  ad  Harm,)  It  is  said  of  the  devil  that 
he  abode  not  in  the  truth  (John  viii.  44),  because  he  fell  from  his 
first  estate,  and  was  “ a liar  and  the  father  of  a lie.” 

Ver.  7. — But  if  we  walk  in  the  light  (of  reason,  virtue,  grace), 
going  on  from  virtue  to  virtue,  as  He  is  in  the  light.  He  is  in 
truth  the  very  substantial  and  divine  Light,  and  does  all  things  in 
the  light  of  wisdom,  prudence,  and  divine  holiness. 

We  have  fellowship  one  with  another , and  consequently  with  God. 
S.  Augustine  truly  said  ( Confess . iv.  9),  “Blessed  is  he  that  loveth 
Thee,  his  friend  in  Thee,  and  his  enemy  on  account  of  Thee.  For 
he  loses  no  friend  to  whom  all  men  are  dear  in  Him,  who  is  never 
lost.”  See  Prov.  iv.  18,  and  Phil  ii.  15.  S.  Augustine  says  (de  Verb. 
Apost.  Serm.  xv.),  “Ye  see  that  we  are  wayfarers.  What  then  is 
walking  ? It  is  in  a word  to  make  progress,  lest  ye  should  not  under- 
stand this,  and  walk  too  slowly.  Be  ever  displeased  with  what  thou 

art,  if  thou  wishest  to  arrive  at  that  which  as  yet  thou  art  not.  For 
vol.  v.  z 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


354  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  I. 

thou  remainest  in  the  spot  where  thou  art  satisfied  to  be.  If  thou 
sayest  it  is  enough,  thou  art  lost.  Ever  be  adding  somewhat,  ever 
be  walking,  ever  make  progress.  Do  not  tarry  in  the  way,  do  not 
turn  back.  He  tarries  who  is  not  going  onward,  he  turns  back  who 
goes  back  to  his  old  starting-place — he  who  apostatises  turns  away 
from  the  path.  A lame  man  who  walks  in  the  way,  is  better  than  a 
swift  runner  who  goes  astray  from  it.” 

And  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son  cleanse th  us  from  all  sin. 
But  not  so  as  to  make  us  impeccable.  It  means  that  He  has  cleansed 
us  from  our  sins  by  baptism,  that  He  cleanses  us  (at  the  present 
time)  from  venial  sins,  and  will  cleanse  us  hereafter  from  the  peril  ot 
mortal  sins,  and  at  last  will  cleanse  in  heaven  from  all  concupiscence. 
S.  John  uses  the  present  tense,  as  including  both  the  past  and  future. 
(See  S.  Augustine  and  Bede  in  loc.  and  S.  Jerome  contra  Pelag.  Lib . ii.) 

Here  note  (i.)  that  God  does  not  merely  erase  sins,  but  washes  them 
away  entirely.  The  Council  of  Trent  (Sess.  vi.  chap.  6)  says,  “No  one 
can  be  righteous  unless  the  merits  of  Chrises  Passion  are  imparted  to 
him,”  &c.  And  Clement  VI.  ( Extrav . ‘ Unigenitus *)  asserts  that  “ one 
drop  of  Christ’s  blood  could  have  redeemed  the  whole  world,  as  being 
the  blood  of  the  Word  by  hypostatic  union.”  S.  Gregory  Nazianzen 
says,  “ No  miracle  is  comparable  with  that  of  our  salvation,  wherein  a 
few  drops  of  blood  restored  the  whole  world,  and  (as  blood  curdles 
milk)  binds  us  all  into  one;”  and  S.  Augustine,  on  Ps.  lxv.,  “Ask  ye 
what  He  purchased  ? See  what  He  gave,  and  then  find  out  what  He 
purchased.  The  blood  of  Christ  is  the  price.  What  did  it  purchase, 
save  the  whole  world  ? ” “ The  blood  of  the  Lord  is  the  price  of  pur 
life,”  &c.  And  S.  Ambrose  (de  Virg.  Lib.  iil),  “We  have  all  things  in 
Christ.  Let  every  soul  draw  nigh  to  Him,  whether  suffering  from 
bodily  sins,  or  firmly  fastened  by  the  nails  of  worldly  desire,  or  which 
is  still  imperfect,  but  yet  is  making  progress  in  inward  meditation,  or 
being  even  perfect  in  many  virtues  is  altogether  in  the  power  of  God ; 
and  Christ  is  all  things  to  us.  If  thou  wishest  to  cure  thy  wound,  He 
is  thy  Physician ; if  thou  art  burning  with  fever,  He  is  a fountain  of 
waters;  if  thou  art  burdened  with  guilt,  He  is  thy  righteousness;  if  thou 
needest  help,  He  is  thy  strength ; if  thou  fearest  death,  He  is  thy  life  ; 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  UNIVERSALITY  OF  SIN. 


355 


if  thou  longest  for  heaven,  He  is  the  way ; if  thou  shrinkest  from 
darkness,  He  is  thy  light ; if  thou  seekest  food,  He  is  thy  sustenance.” 

The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  is  put,  by  a metonymy,  for  the  pouring 
forth  His  Blood.  It  follows  that  His  blood  cleanses  us  not  physi- 
cally but  meritoriously.  But  see  S.  Thomas  (3  part  9.  48,  art . 6,  and 
9.  50,  art . 6),  who  says  that  it  has  physically  power  to  sanctify  as 
being  the  physical  instrument  which  God  makes  use  of  for  our  sancti- 
fication. But  see  the  whole  passage. 

8.  If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin , we  deceive  ourselves \ Cajetan 
understands  this  of  original  sin,  which  we  all  contract  from  Adam, 
the  Blessed  Virgin  alone  excepted  (see  authorities  quoted).  (2.) 
Lyranus  understands  it  of  mortal  sin,  from  which  no  one  can  dare  to 
assert  that  he  is  free.  (3.)  Cardinal  Hugo  and  others  generally  under- 
stand it  of  venial  sin,  into  which  we  cannot  help  falling.  See  Cone . 
Irid.  sess.  iii.  can . 23,  where,  however,  the  Blessed  Virgin  is  counted 
as  an  exception.  By  speaking  in  the  first  person  John  includes 
himself  and  the  other  Apostles,  for  though  they  were  so  strengthened 
by  grace  that  they  could  not  sin  mortally,  yet  they  did  sin  venially. 
And  how  much  more  are  we  guilty,  and  how  constantly  should  we 
humble  ourselves  and  sorrow  for  our  sins.  Others  regard  it  as 
speaking  of  the  punishment  of  sin,  others  of  concupiscence  which 
remains  even  in  those  who  are  regenerate  and  justified.  See  Cone . 
Indent \ But  we  may  include  all  sin  under  one  general  statement, 
the  word  * have 1 comprehending  both  past  and  future  time.  We  have 
had  original  sin,  and  we  have,  or  shall  have,  some  actual  sin.  In 
ver.  10  the  past  tense  is  used.  S.  John  wishes  to  show  that  all  are 
guilty  of  sin,  and  need  redemption  by  Christ,  for  he  says,  " If  we 
say  that  we  have  no  sin,”  &c.  But  though  these  words  may  be 
taken  as  referring  to  all  sin,  yet  properly  and  directly  they  speak  of 
actual  sin,  whether  mortal  or  venial.  For  he  speaks  of  our  confessing 
our  sins,  which  refers  only  to  actual  sins.  The  meaning  then  is  this, 
that  we  deceive  ourselves  if  we  assert  that  we  are  free  from  any 
actual  sin.  It  is  thus  understood  by  the  Council  of  Millois,  S. 
Jerome,  S.  Basil,  S.  Gregory  (Mor.  xviii.  4),  and  many  others.  S. 
James  supports  this  view  (chap.  iii.  2).  Both  S.  John  and  S.  James 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


356  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  I. 

refer  to  the  heretics  of  their  own  day,  who  said  that  unbelief  was 
the  only  sin,  and  that  all  things  were  pure  to  the  believer,  however 
foul  his  life.  Luther  and  the  Libertines  taught  the  same,  while  the 
Beynards  and  Beguines  considered  they  had  attained  to  such  perfec- 
tion that  they  could  not  possibly  sin,  under  whatever  temptation. 
Pelagius  taught  that  all  sins  could  be  avoided  by  the  power  of  nature 
alone.  Durandus  (in  Part  ii.  Dist  xxviii.  q . 3)  had  much  the  same 
opinion,  viz.,  that  all  deliberate  venial  sins  could  be  avoided,  but 
not  all  such  as  come  upon  us  by  surprise.  See  Eccles.  vii.  20,  and 
Prov.  xxiv.  16.  It  is  then  our  humiliation  to  own  ourselves  sinners, 
and  to  pray  daily  in  our  Lord’s  words,  “Forgive  us  our  trespasses.” 
S.  Augustine  (de  Nat . et  Gratia, , cap.  xxxvi.)  says,  “With  the  exception 
of  the  Virgin  Mary  (respecting  whom  I do  not  wish,  for  the  honour 
of  the  Lord,  to  raise  any  question  about  sin,  for  we  know  that  more 
grace  was  given  her  to  overcome  sin  of  every  kind,  to  whom  it  was 
vouchsafed  to  conceive  and  bear  Him  who,  it  is  admitted,  had  no 
sin) — with  her  exception,  if  we  were  to  question  all  those  holy  men 
and  women,  when  they  were  living  here,  what,  think  you,  would  be 
their  answer?  that  which  this  man,  or  what  the  apostle  John,  said? 
would  they  not  say,  ‘If  we  say  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive  our- 
selves'?” And  so  too  S.  Gregory  (Horn,  xxxix.  on  the  Gospels) : “If 
then  thou  art  elated  by  thy  learning,  thy  wealth,  &c.,  knowest  thou 
who  thou  art?  Thou  art  a sinner.  Knowest  thou  what  sin  is  ? It  is 
the  greatest  vileness,  the  greatest  misery  of  man,  the  greatest  evil  to 
the  world,  for  it  is  in  the  highest  measure  opposed  to  the  highest  good. 
It  is  the  greatest  contempt  of  God,  the  greatest  ingratitude,  the 
greatest  hatred  of  God,  the  greatest  offence  to  Him.  It  is  Christicide, 
nay  Deicide.  For  if  God  could  be  killed,  sin  would  be  the  weapon.” 
Cassian  ( Collet . xxxii.  cap, . 19.)  gives  an  example  from  prayer,  in 
which  there  is  scarce  any  one  who  does  not  wander  in  thought,  and 
thus  commit  a venial  sin.  But  he  seems  to  say  that  anything  which 
withdraws  us,  even  against  our  wills,  from  continual  contemplation 
of  God,  is  a sin ; and  therefore  he  must  be  read  with  caution.  But 
he  must  be  understood  to  speak  of  the  evil  of  punishment,  from 
which  however  there  frequently  arises  the  evil  of  guilt. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  CONFESSION  OF  SIN. 


357 


We  deceive  ourselves , and  moreover  are  deceived  in  our  own  minds : 
to  the  ruin  of  our  soul.  For  he  who  thinks  he  is  free  from  sin, 
neglects  to  seek  a remedy  for  that  sin,  for  which  he  will  be  punished. 
And  moreover,  he  proudly  contradicts  Scripture,  which  says  that  we 
all  are  sinners,  and  does  away  with  the  grace  and  passion  of  Christ, 
in  saying  that  he  does  not  need  to  be  cleansed  by  His  Blood. 

And  the  truth  is  not  in  us.  That  is,  we  lie.  S.  Augustine  (com- 
menting on  Eccles.  vii.,  in  Sententiis  Sent.  365)  says,  “ He  who  is 
just  overmuch,  becomes  unjust  over  much.  For  who  is  he  who 
makes  himself  just,  but  he  who  says  that  he  has  no  sin?” 

Ver.  9. — If  we  confess.  S.  John  here  suggests  a remedy  for  sin, 
namely,  its  sincere  acknowledgment,  and  humble  confession,  and 
penance,  for  by  this  is  the  Blood  of  Christ  applied  to  us,  to  cleanse 
us  from  it.  But  what  is  the  kind  of  confession  which  he  requires  ? a 
general  confession  made  to  God,  or  a special  confession  to  a Priest  ? 
S.  John  seems  to  require  both  of  those,  a general  confession  for 
lighter  sins,  special  confession  for  grave  ones.  Mortal  sins  must  be 
confessed,  not  only  to  God,  but  to  the  Priest,  who  has  power  to  for- 
give (John  xx.  23).  See  Bellarmine,  de  Pcenit.  i.  13,  iii.  4.  As  S. 
Cyprian  says  (Sertn.  de  Lapsis)  : “ In  this  way  do  they  remove  the 

burden  of  their  mind,  and  seek  for  a salutary  remedy  for  such  small 
and  slight  wounds.”  And  Tertullian  (de  Pcenit.  ch.  3)  says,  “Confes- 
sion removes  the  burden  of  sins,  just  as  concealment  adds  to  it.”  He 
then  sets  forth  the  acts  of  penance ; as  sackcloth  and  ashes,  simple 
food,  frequent  fasts,  tears  and  sighs,  & c As  S.  Chrysostom  briefly 
says,  “Penitence  is  contrition  of  heart,  confession  with  the  lips, 
and  humility  in  every  act” 

See  here  the  great  benefit  of  confession,  in  appeasing  God’s  wrath, 
and  obtaining  His  grace.  (See  Is.  xliii.  26,  sec  lxx.,  and  Ps.  li.  4, 
xxxii.  5).  Origen,  on  Ps.  xxxvii.  [xxxviii.],  says  that  it  is  like  a 
vomit,  which  relieves  the  overloaded  stomach.  And  S.  Diadochus 
says  that  it  is  the  best  remedy  against  sin  for  “ religious  ” to  confess 
to  their  spiritual  director;  and  S.  Francis,  quoting  S.  Augustine 
(Sentent.)y  says,  “If  thou  excusest  thyself,  God  accuses  thee;  and  if 
thou  accusest  thyself,  He  excuses  thee.”  Besides  this,  S.  John 


Digitized  by  ^ 


358  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  I. 


teaches  us  that  as  we  sin  frequently,  we  should  confess  frequently, 
for  trifling  sins,  if  neglected,  become  great  ones,  “as  many  drops 
fill  a river,  and  many  grains  make  up  a mass.”  And  what  differ- 
ence is  it,  whether  a ship  be  sunk  with  one  huge  wave,  or  by  the 
gradual  oozing  in  of  water,  through  a neglected  leak?  See  Ecclus. 
xix.  i.  And  as  S.  Gregory  says,  “ If  we  neglect  to  cure  small  faults, 
we  are  insensibly  led  on  to  boldly  commit  greater  ones ; ” and  again, 
“He  who  neglects  to  sorrow  for  and  avoid  even  the  least  sins, 
does  not  fall  suddenly  from  a state  of  grace,  but,  by  little  and  little, 
he  falls  entirely  away.  Those  then  who  frequently  fall  away  in 
little  things,  should  seriously  consider  that  sometimes  we  sin  more 
grievously  in  a little  fault  than  in  a greater  one.  For  the  greater  it 
is,  the  more  quickly  do  we  discover  that  it  is  a fault,  and  therefore 
more  speedily  correct  it,  whereas  a smaller  fault  is  counted  as 
nothing,  and  is  therefore  more  fatally  and  more  unconcernedly  per- 
severed in.  And  frequently  a mind  accustomed  to  lesser  faults 
dreads  not  greater  ones.” 

Is  faithful . Because  He  who  told  us  to  pray  for  forgiveness  of 
our  sins  promised  that  His  fatherly  forgiveness  and  pardon  would 
follow.  (S.  Cyprian,  de  Oral.  Dorn .) 

And  just.  How  is  this  ? He  is  not  bound  as  an  act  of  justice  to 
forgive  sins  even  to  him  who  is  penitent.  It  is  of  His  mere  mercy 
and  clemency.  But  it  is  fitting  and  an  act  worthy  of  God  to  forgive 
the  sin  of  a penitent,  both  because  He  promised  to  do  so,  as  the 
reward  of  penitence  (see  John  xx.  23,  Ezek.  xviii.  32,  and  else- 
where)— His  promise  is  a debt  which  ought  to  be  paid — as  well  as 
being  in  accordance  with  Divine  goodness.  “ It  is  just  for  Thee, 
O God,  to  spare  the  wicked:  it  is  also  just  to  punish  them,”  says 
S.  Anselm  (in  Prosolog.  cap . ix.  and  x.)  Some  accordingly  explain 
‘just’  as  compassionate,  compassion  being  most  accordant  with 
God’s  nature,  and  penitence  in  its  very  nature  is  a disposition 
towards  reconciliation  and  grace. 

2.  He  is  just.  Because  Christ  has  by  this  death  merited 
pardon  for  us,  and  God  has  promised  it  Him.  The  remission  of 
our  sins  is  due  to  Christ  and  not  to  ourselves.  And  Christ  com- 


' '***  Digitized  by  Google 


penitence  and  justice. 


municates  His  merits  to  the  sinner,  and  makes  them  his,  so  that 
he  can  offer  them  as  his  own  to  God.  And  God  is  just  in  accepting 
this  ransom.  This  rule  of  justice,  properly  speaking,  is  with  reference 
to  Christ,  not  to  ourselves.  For  otherwise  we  (and  not  Christ) 
should  be  our  own  redeemers,  which  is  impious  and  a wrong  to 
Christ. 

3.  Suarez  says,  rather  too  subtilly  (3  p.  disp.  xi.  sect.  1,  cone.  3), 
“ He  is  faithful,  whence  He  forgives  penitents  their  more  mortal  sins, 
but  just  when  He  condones  the  venial  sins  of  the  righteous,  because 
they  deserve  this  by  their  deserts  ” (de  condigno).  (See  S.  Augustine,  de 
Corrupt  and  Grat.  cap.  xiii.) 

4.  God  is  in  a certain  way  i just  ’ when  He  forgives  one  who  is 
penitent  and  confesses  his  mortal  sins,  because  this  is  a kind  of 
satisfaction.  Just  as  an  offender  who  vilifies  his  neighbour,  by 
humbling  himself  and  asking  pardon,  and  the  offended  person  is 
bound  in  justice  to  accept  this  satisfaction,  so  does  the  penitent 
make  some  kind  of  satisfaction  to  God  when  he  humbly  confesses 
his  faults,  and  especially  if  he  does  so  from  true  and  perfect  contri- 
tion. For  contrition,  proceeding  as  it  does  from  the  love  of  God 
above  all  things,  is  a kind  of  compensation  for  the  wrong  and  slight 
he  has  done  to  God  by  preferring  the  creature  to  Him.  For  the 
love  which  loves  God  above  all  things  compensates  for  the  hatred 
felt  towards  Him,  as  the  honour  paid  Him  makes  up  for  the  former 
contempt  and  slight,  though  not  to  an  equal  extent.  And  therefore 
it  is  just  in  a certain  measure  that  God  should  pardon  the  sinner  for 
some  such  acts  as  these.  And  for  this  reason  penitence  is  counted 
by  theologians  as  closely  allied  to  justice,  and  as  its  effective  part. 
Nay,  Durandus  (in  4 Dist  14  q.)  thinks  that  penitence  is  reciprocal 
justice,  inasmuch  as  the  theological  virtues  enjoin  it  to  make  due 
satisfaction  (as  far  as  it  can)  for  its  offence.  But  others  on  every 
side  more  truly  suppose  that  penitence  is  a special  virtue  distinct 
from  strict  justice,  and  all  other  moral  virtues.  Richard  (in  4 Dist 
art  i.  q , a)  adds,  that  the  merits  of  Christ  being  granted,  peni- 
tence can  in  strictness,  as  an  act  of  justice,  make  satisfaction  for  sin. 
And  (on  Dist  xvii.  art  2,  Qucest  7)  he  asserts  that  contrition,  if  it 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


360  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S JOHN,  C t. 

precedes  remission  of  sins,  merits  it  by  desert  (ex  condigno).  And 
so  also  others  teach  that  contrition  stands  on  the  same  level  as 
mortal  sin,  and  can  by  itself  make  satisfaction  for  it.  And  they 
derive  that  from  S.  Thomas*  own  principles  ; for  he  teaches  (1,  2 q. 
1 13,  art.  8)  that  in  the  justification  of  a sinner,  sanctifying  grace  is 
infused  prior  to  contrition  and  remission  of  sin.  In  this  he  is 
followed  by  many  of  his  disciples.  But  the  general  opinion  is 
otherwise,  namely,  that  contrition  does  not  result  from  sanctifying, 
but  from  prescient  grace.  For  since  contrition  disposes  us  for  re- 
ceiving sanctifying  grace,  it  cannot  result  from  it,  but  necessarily  pre- 
cedes it  (see  Cone.  Iriden.  sess.  vi.  chap . 6,  7,  and  8),  and  consequently 
teaches  that  we  are  justified  freely,  and  do  not  merit  that  justifica- 
tion which  includes  remission  of  sins.  (See  authorities  quoted.) 

And  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness . Sin  and  unrighteous- 
ness are  here  used  synonymously. 

Ver.  10. — If  we  say  that  we  have  not  sinned \ &c.  1.  By  original 
sin,  and  (2)  by  actual  sin.  This  no  one  questions.  S.  John  probably 
refers  to  venial  sins.  He  uses  the  past  tense,  as  speaking  to  those 
who  had  been  converted  from  heathenism,  and  who  in  that  state 
had  committed  many  grievous  sins.  Again,  among  those  who  had 
been  brought  to  Christ  many  deferred  their  baptism  till  the  last, 
and  were  consequently  termed  ‘ clinics.*  The  Fathers  severely  con- 
demn them.  But  those  who  were  baptized  as  children,  had  com 
mitted  (as  adults)  many  venial  sins,  at  least.  The  Apostle  therefore 
speaks  to  all  in  the  past  tense,  as  wishing  to  warn  them  for  the 
future,  that  (as  having  been  regenerate)  they  should  carefully 
abstain  from  sin,  as  he  says  in  the  next  chapter. 

We  make  Him  a liar.  Because  God  says  in  Scripture  that  all 
men  are  sinners  and  do  not  live  without  sin.  See  Eccles.  vii.  20 ; 
Prov.  xxiv.  16 ; Ps.  cxlii.  2 ; James  iii.  2,  and  elsewhere,  and  in  the 
Lord’s  Prayer. 

And  His  word  ahideth  not  in  us.  We  do  not  understand,  or 
embrace,  or  retain  its  true  doctrine,  or  anyhow  we  forget  it.  We 
do  not  believe  Scripture,  which  says  that  we  are  all  liable  to  sin.  So 
S.  Clement,  Didymus,  Cajetan,  and  others.  But  the  Gloss  under- 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


NEED  OF  HUMILITY. 


361 

stands  by  * His  Word  ’ His  Son  Jesus  Christ ; and  says  that  He 
abides  not  in  us,  because  from  our  unbelief  and  pride  we  overthrow 
the  mystery  of  redemption,  and  say  that  we  do  not  need,  nor  ever 
needed,  a Redeemer.  Or  it  may  mean  the  word  which  God  has  said 
(“the  greater  thou  art,  humble  thyself  the  more,”  Ecclus.  iii.  20) 
abideth  not  in  us.  For  we  do  the  exact  contrary,  and  being  of  no 
account,  and  sinners,  we  wish  to  be  great,  and  incapable  of  sin. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


C 36a  ) 


CHAPTER  II. 

I He  comforteth  them  against  the  sins  of  infirmity.  3 Rightly  to  know  Goa  is  to 
keep  his  commandments , 9 to  love  our  brethren , 15  and  not  to  love  the  world . 
18  We  must  beware  of  seducers : 20  from  whose  deceits  the  godly  are  safet  pre- 
served by  perseverance  in  faith}  and  holiness  of  life. 

MY  little  children,  these  things  write  I unto  you,  that  ye  sin  not  And  if  any 
man  sin,  we  have  an  advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous: 
2 And  he  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins : and  not  for  ours  only,  but  also  for  the 
sins  (f  the  whole  world. 

3  And  hereby  we  do  know  that  we  know  him,  if  we  keep  his  commandments. 

4  He  that  saith,  I know  him,  and  keepeth  not  his  commandments,  is  a liar,  and 
the  truth  is  not  in  him. 

5  But  whoso  keepeth  his  word,  in  him  verily  is  the  love  of  God  perfected : 
hereby  know  we  that  we  are  in  him. 

6  He  that  saith  he  abideth  in  him  ought  himself  also  so  to  walk,  even  as  he 
walked. 

7  Brethren,  I write  no  new  commandment  unto  you,  but  an  old  commandment 
which  ye  had  from  the  beginning.  The  old  commandment  is  the  word  which  ye 
have  heard  from  the  beginning. 

8  Again,  a new  commandment  I write  unto  you,  which  thing  is  true  in  him 
and  in  you  : because  the  darkness  is  past,  and  the  true  light  now  shineth. 

9  He  that  saith  he  is  in  the  light,  and  hateih  his  brother,  is  in  darkness  even 
until  now. 

10  He  that  loveth  his  brother  abideth  in  the  light,  and  there  is  none  occasion 
of  stumbling  in  him. 

1 1  But  he  that  hateth  his  brother  is  in  darkness,  and  walketh  in  darkness,  and 
knoweth  not  whither  he  goeth,  because  that  darkness  hath  blinded  his  eyes. 

12  I write  unto  you,  little  children,  because  your  sins  are  forgiven  you  for  his 
name's  sake. 

13  I write  unto  you,  fathers,  because  ye  have  known  him  that  is  from  the 
beginning.  I write  unto  you,  young  men,  because  ye  have  overcome  the  wicked 
one.  I write  unto  you,  little  children,  because  ye  have  known  the  Father. 

14  I have  written  unto  you,  fathers,  because  ye  have  known  him  that  is  from 
the  beginning.  I have  written  unto  you,  young  men,  because  ye  are  strong,  and 
the  word  of  God  abideth  in  you,  and  ye  have  overcome  the  wicked  one. 

15  Love  not  the  world,  neither  the  things  that  are  in  the  world.  If  any  man 
love  the  world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him. 

16  For  all  that  is  in  the  world,  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  and  the  lust  of  the  eyes, 
and  the  pride  of  life,  is  not  of  the  Father,  but  is  of  the  world. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHRIST  OUR  ADVOCATE.  363 

17  And  the  world  passeth  away,  and  the  lust  thereof : but  he  that  doeth  the 
will  of  God  abideth  for  ever. 

18  Little  children,  it  is  the  last  time  : and  as  ye  have  heard  that  antichrist  shall 
come,  even  now  are  there  many  antichrists ; whereby  we  know  that  it  is  the  last 
time. 

19  They  went  out  from  us,  but  they  were  not  of  us ; for  if  they  had  been  of 
us,  they  would  no  doubt  have  continued  with  us : but  they  went  out,  that  they  might 
be  made  manifest  that  they  were  not  all  of  us. 

20  But  ye  have  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One,  and  ye  know  all  things. 

21  I have  not  written  unto  you  because  ye  know  not  the  truth,  but  because  ye 
know  it,  and  that  no  lie  is  of  the  truth. 

22  Who  is  a liar  but  he  that  denieth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  ? He  is  antichrist, 
that  denieth  the  Father  and  the  Son. 

23  Whosoever  denieth  the  Son,  the  same  hath  not  the  Father : [< but]  he  that 
acknowledged  the  Son  hath  the  Father  also. 

24  Let  that  therefore  abide  in  you,  which  ye  have  heard  from  the  beginning. 
If  that  which  ye  have  heard  from  the  beginning  shall  remain  in  you,  ye  also  shall 
continue  in  the  Son,  and  in  the  Father. 

25  And  this  is  the  promise  that  he  hath  promised  us,  even  eternal  life. 

26  These  things  have  I written  unto  you  concerning  them  that  seduce  you. 

27  But  the  anointing  which  ye  have  received  of  him  abideth  in  you,  and  ye 
need  not  that  any  man  teach  you  : but  as  the  same  anointing  teacheth  you  of  all 
things,  and  is  truth,  and  is  no  lie,  and  even  as  it  hath  taught  you,  ye  shall  abide 
in  him. 

28  And  now,  little  children,  abide  in  him  ; that,  when  he  shall  appear,  we  may 
have  confidence,  and  not  be  ashamed  before  him  at  his  coming. 

29  If  ye  know  that  he  is  righteous,  ye  know  that  every  one  that  doeth  righte- 
ousness is  born  of  him. 

Ver.  1. — My  little  children,  these  things  write  I unto  you,  that  ye 
sin  not  At  the  end  of  the  last  chapter  it  was  said  that  all  who  were 
grown  up  had  sinned,  either  mortally  as  heathens,  or  venially  as 
Christians.  But  he  now  exhorts  them  one  by  one  to  be  most 
watchful  against  the  sins  they  committed  as  heathens,  and  to  abstain 
as  far  as  they  could  from  venial  sins.  For  though  it  be  impossible 
to  avoid  them  collectively,  yet  it  is  possible  to  avoid  them  one 
by  one,  especially  such  as  are  committed  not  by  surprise,  but  with 
previous  consideration,  and  deliberately. 

But  if  any  man  sin , we  have  an  Advocate . This  anticipates  the 
objection,  what  then  will  he  do,  who  through  human  weakness  has 
fallen  into  some  unusual  and  shameful  sin  ? He  answers,  he  should 
not  despair,  or  be  cast  down,  because  we  have  Christ  as  our  advocate 
with  our  most  loving  Father,  Christ  who  by  presenting  His  death 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


364  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  II. 

and  sufferings  which  He  underwent  for  us,  will  easily  obtain  our 
pardon,  if  we  are  truly  penitent,  for  God  is  most  merciful,  and 
Christ's  merits  are  infinite.  And  just  as  the  severity  of  a wound  or 
disease  displays  the  skill  and  credit  of  the  physician  who  cures  them, 
so  does  the  greatness  of  our  sins  which  He  heals,  and  in  which  He 
is  a propitiator,  set  forth  the  greatness  of  Christ's  mercy,  grace,  and 
redemption.  As  in  the  case  of  the  Magdalene  and  S.  Paul  See 
1 Tim.  i.  15.  Here  observe  Advocate  means  one  who  pleads 
our  cause : in  a forensic  sense ; and  He  is  so — 1.  By  displaying  His 
wounds,  and  thus  silently  pleading  His  own  merits.  2.  Many,  with 
great  probability,  assert  that  He  is  ever  praying  for  us  orally,  being 
no  longer  a wayfarer  on  earth,  but  as  having  attained  to  his  rest  and 
claiming  our  pardon  as  His  right  See  Heb.  vii.  25,  ix.  12  ; John  xiv. 
16;  Rom.  vii.  3.  Beza  and  others  thence  contend  that  the  saints 
are  not  our  advocates,  and  that  we  make  them  superior  to  Christ,  if 
we  regard  them  as  such.  But  they  reason  falsely,  for  we  know  and 
profess  that  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God,  and  that  the  Blessed  Virgin 
and  the  Saints  are  immeasurably  inferior  to  Him.  But  yet  they  inter, 
cede  for  us  through  His  merits.  See  S.  Irenaeus,  v.  29 ; S.  Bernard, 
xii. ; and  on  the  whole  question,  Bellarmine,  de  Invocat.  Sand. 

Jesus  Christ  the  righteous . That  is,  (1.)  Innocent  and  holy,  and 
who  by  His  very  sanctity  is  most  loved  of  the  Father,  and  desirous 
to  be  heard  of  Him.  (2.)  He  who  made  a full  satisfaction  for  our 
sins,  paying  a full  ransom  for  them  by  His  own  Blood.  He  is  then 
our  righteous  advocate  in  another  sense,  as  pleading  a righteous 
cause,  as  those  who  plead  for  gain.  Whence  Cassiodorus  says 
( Epist \ xi.  4.),  “ If  in  your  zeal  for  advocacy  ye  have  shone  forth 

with  the  light  of  justice."  Such  an  one,  then,  is  a good  advocate 
amongst  men,  but  not  with  God,  since  we  ask  of  Him,  not  justice, 
but  mercy  and  grace.  And  His  is  a tribunal  of  grace. 

Ver  2. — And  (i.e.  because)  He  is  the  propitiation  (the  propitiator) 
for  our  sins . For  by  offering  Himself  on  the  Cross  as  a Victim  for 
sins,  He  has  made  satisfaction  for  them,  and  reconciled  the  Father 
to  us.  This  refers  to  the  mercy-seat,  which  was  above  the  ark 
(see  Exod.  xxv.  17),  which  represented  Christ  our  Propitiator  (see 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  BLOOD  OK  CHRIST. 


365 


Rom.  iii.  25.)  S.  Augustine  (de  Fide  et  Operibus)  reads,  “ He  is 
the  entreater  (exoratio)  for  our  sins.”  S.  Cyprian  reads  deprecatio, 
John  means  that  Christ  is  so  powerful  an  advocate,  that  our  case 
cannot  fail  in  His  hands,  being  Himself,  by  His  very  office,  our 
redemption  and  propitiation,  who  made  a full  satisfaction  for 
our  sins. 

So  S.  John  says  (Rev.  i.  5) ; and  S.  Leo  (Serm.  xii.  de  Passione ),  “The 
pouring  forth  of  His  righteous  Blood  for  the  unrighteous,  was  so 
powerful  to  gain  this  privilege,  so  fully  sufficimt  to  pay  the  price, 
that  if  the  whole  body  of  captives  believed  in  their  Redeemer,  the 
bands  of  tyranny  would  not  retain  their  hold  of  a single  one  . . . For 
though  the  death  of  the  Saints  was  precious  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord,  yet  it  was  not  the  death  of  any  innocent  person  that  was  the 
propitiation  of  the  world.  The  righteous  received  crowns,  they 
did  not  confer  them.  In  the  fortitude  of  the  saints  were  exhibited 
examples  of  patience,  not  gifts  of  righteousness.  They  each  died 
their  own  several  deaths,  and  none  of  them  dying  discharged  any 
other's  debt  than  his  own,  since  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  stood  forth 
alone  among  the  sons  of  men,  in  whom  all  are  crucified,  all  die^ 
all  are  buried,  and  all  moreover  will  be  raised  again.”  For  this 
cause  S.  Augustine  and  other  saints  who  had  sinned  betook  them- 
selves to  the  wounds  of  Christ,  and  dwelt  therein  as  in  a refuge. 
See  note  on  Zech.  xiii.  As  S.  Ambrose  (pref  in  Ps.  xxxv.)  says, 
“ The  Blood  of  Christ  is  fine  gold,  plenteous  to  redeem,  and  flowing 
forth  to  wash  away  every  sin.” 

And  not  for  ours  only , but  also  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world. 
Not  for  Jews  only  but  for  Gentiles,  to  whom  Christ  ordered  the  Gospel 
to  be  preached.  Again,  Christ  is  offered  in  the  Sacrifice  of  the  Mass 
for  all  men,  excepting  those  who  are  excommunicated. 

And  hereby  do  we  know  that  we  know  Him,  if  we  keep  His  com- 
mandments. We  know  Him  by  probability  and  conjecturally.  But 
our  knowledge  must  be  practised : it  must  show  itself  in  love  and 
affection,  and  in  outward  acts.  And  we  shall  in  this  way  secure 
Him  as  our  Advocate.  S.  Augustine  says  (De  Fide  et  Oper . cap . xii.), 
“ Let  not  our  mind  be  so  deceived  as  to  think  that  it  knows  God 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


36 6 FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  II. 


if  it  confess  Him  with  a dead  faith,  that  is,  without  works.”  So 
David  says,  Ps.  ciii.  18,  “ To  think  upon  His  commandments  to 
do  them.”  See  his  dying  advice  to  Solomon,  “ Know  thou  the  God 
of  thy  fathers,”  that  is  believe,  reverence,  love,  and  obey  Him. 
See  also  Hos.  vi.  6,  For  he  who  does  not  observe  the  law  of  God 
assuredly  does  not  know  itj  because  he  does  not  practically  value 
or  ponder  as  he  ought  on  His  boundless  majesty,  goodness,  power, 
wisdom,  and  righteousness,  for  else  he  would  love,  reverence,  and 
obey  Him  with  his  whole  heart.  For,  as  Bede  says,  “ He  who  loves 
not  God,  shows  that  he  knows  not  His  loveliness,  and  he  has  not 
learned  to  taste  and  see  how  gracious  and  sweet  He  is,  if  he  does 
not  labour  continually  to  do  those  things  which  are  pleasing  in  His 
sight”  See  chap.  iv.  7,  8. 

Catharinus  wrongly  infers  that  the  righteous  can  know  for  certain 
that  they  are  righteous  and  in  God’s  favour.  But  although  they 
may  have  grace  and  the  love  of  God  in  their  hearts,  yet  they  do 
not  see  them,  and  though  they  outwardly  observe  the  command- 
ments of  God,  yet  they  know  not  whether  they  observe  them  from  love 
of  Him,  and  as  He  commanded.  And  though  they  feel  that  they 
love  God,  yet  they  know  not  whether  this  love  is  what  it  should  be, 
and  simply  for  God’s  sake.  {See  Cone . Indent  sess.  vi.  cap . 9 ; 
Bellarmine,  de  Justify  iii.  1 seq.) 

Ver.  4. — He  that  saith  he  knoweth  Him , that  is,  with  true  and 
saving  knowledge,  such  as  leads  to  eternal  life,  and  keepeth  not  His 
commandments , is  a liar . As  the  Apostle  said  (Rom.  i.  21)  of  the 
philosophers  who  knew  God,  but  only  in  a speculative  and  barren 
way,  u When  they  knew  God,  they  glorified  Him  not  as  God.” 

Ver.  5. — But  whoso  keepeth  His  word9  in  him  verily  is  the  love  of 
God  perfected . This  confirms  the  previous  statement,  by  way  of 
antithesis.  The  word  is  spoken  of  in  the  singular  number,  because 
the  law  of  love  comprehends  all  others,  just  as  a root  implies  the 
leaves  and  fruit,  and  the  whole  tree. 

Perfect  love  is  that  which  fulfils  that  command,  “Thou  shalt 
love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,”  &c.  (Matt  xxii.  37.)  For 
he  who  observes  the  commands  of  God  loves  God  with  all  his 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LOVE,  THE  ROOT  OF  ALL  GOOD.  367 

heart,  though  he  may  sin  venially,  which  is  a necessary  evil  in  this 
life  of  corruption.  But  in  this  perfectness  of  Christian  charity  and 
life  there  are  various  grades.  The  first  is  so  to  love  God  with 
all  the  heart  as  never  to  offend  Him  mortally.  2.  Never  deliber- 
ately to  offend  Him  venially,  even  for  the  sake  of  the  whole  world. 
3.  To  renounce,  for  the  love  of  God,  the  love  of  every  creature, 
and  to  devote  thyself  entirely  to  His  service  as  “ religious  ” do. 
See,  too,  Rom.  viii.  35.  4*  Not  to  think,  wish,  or  love  anything 

save  God,  or  for  His  sake.  Origen  (Prcef.  in  Evan.  S.  Joan)  says, 
“ He  who  is  perfect,  no  longer  lives  himself,  but  Christ  lives  in  him 
and  S.  Augustine  (, Serm . xxxix.  de  temp.  [ nunc  cccL])  says,  “ As 
covetousness  is  the  root  of  all  evil,  so  is  love  the  root  of  all  good. 
The  love  of  God  and  our  neighbour  fills  up  the  whole  length  and 
breadth  of  the  sacred  word.”  He  then  adds,  “ Without  it  a rich  man 
is  poor,  with  it  a poor  man  is  rich.  It  gives  patience  in  adversity, 
moderation  in  prosperity,  endurance  in  hard  sufferings,  and  so  forth.” 
And  S.  Bernard  writes  thus  to  the  brethren  (de  Monte  Dei , xix.): 
“ Perfection,  though  not  of  the  same  kind,  is  required  of  you  all.  As 
one  star  differs  from  another  star  in  glory,  so  does  cell  from  cell,*  in 
the  beginners,  the  progressing,  and  the  perfect  The  first  state  may 
be  called  the  animal,  the  next  the  rational,  the  last  the  spiritual,  the 
first  relating  to  the  body,  the  second  to  the  soul,  the  third  finding 
its  rest  in  God  alone.  Each,  however,  has  its  own  rate  of  progress 
and  measure  of  perfection.  The  beginning  consists  in  perfect 
obedience  in  the  animal  life,  its  progress  in  bringing  the  body  into 
subjection,  its  perfection  in  turning  the  practice  of  good  into  delight 
in  it  And  so  too,  in  the  rational  life,  the  perfection  of  which  is 
the  spiritual  life,  and  the  perfection  of  the  spiritual  life  is  to  be 
changed  into  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory,  as  by  the  Spirit  of 
the  Lord.”  And  S.  Maximus  says  (De  Charitate  Cent.  iii.  97), 
“ That  soul  is  perfect  whose  whole  powers  turn  only  towards  God.” 
See  also  Centur.  iv.  17;  and  S.  Francis  (in  Opusc.  decern  perfect 
—considered  to  be  spurious : see  Cave)  says,  “ A Christian’s  perfec- 

# This  is  not  S.  Bernard’s,  but  was  written  by  William,  Abbot  of  S.  Theodorec. 
Stella  and  cella,  a jingle  on  sounds  (de  Mento  Aureo).  (See  Cave.) 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


368  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  II. 

tion  is  to  root  out  from  his  heart  all  worldly  affections,  and  to  find 
no  root,  or  resting-place,  save  in  Him  who  made  it  And  again,  to 
have  such  patience  as  to  love  him  the  more  who  has  done  or  said 
any  wrong  of  him.  For  as  God  of  His  bounty  conferred  on  him 
all  his  blessings,  so  should  he  believe  that  He  secretly  pledges 
Himself  to  send  on  him  every  kind  of  evil,  in  order  to  show  a 
sinner  his  sins,  and  thus  lightly  punish  them  once  in  this  present 
life,  that  He  may  not  scourge  them  more  severely  for  ever.  He 
should  therefore  love  him  who  has  done  or  spoken  any  evil  against 
him,  as  being  the  messenger  of  God  to  him  for  good,”  &c. 

Hereby  know  we  that  we  are  in  Him . S.  Augustine  here  adds,  c If 
we  be  perfected  in  Him but  nearly  all  MSS.  omit  these  words.  The 
meaning  is,  we  know  that  we  are  in  Him  if  we  keep  His  command- 
ments. This  is  the  effect  and  sign  of  our  cleaving  to  Him.  More- 
over, it  is  by  love  that  we  abide  in  God,  as  the  thing  loved  is  in  the 
lover.  For  the  soul  is  more  in  that  which  it  loves,  than  in  that  which 
it  animates.  And  God  in  return  loves  those  who  love  Him,  dwells 
in  them,  cares  for,  directs  and  protects  them.  Augustine  says,  that 
we  who  love  Christ  are  in  Christ,  as  the  members  in  the  body.  See 
John  xiv.  23.  The  soul  then  of  one  who  loves  God  is  a kind  of 
temple,  in  which  all  the  three  Persons  abide.  And  by  abiding  S. 
John  means  intimate  union,  permanent  resting,  continual  presence, 
friendly  converse,  and  all  other  offices  of  true  friendship. 

Ver.  6. — He  that  saith  he  abideth  in  Him  ought  himself  also  so  to 
walk , even  as  He  walked.  By  advancing  in  virtue,  especially  in 
charity,  and  exhibiting  its  works  more  and  more  every  day,  as  Christ 
“ increased  in  wisdom  and  stature.”  “ The  true  righteousness  of  the 
perfect,”  says  S.  Leo  ( Serm . ii.  de  Quadr .),  “ is  for  them  never  to 
presume  that  they  are  perfect,  lest  by  stopping  short  when  their 
journey  is  not  yet  done,  they  should  incur  the  risk  of  failing.”  See 
Eph.  v.  1.  S.  Prosper  (de  vit.  contemfl.  lib,  11)  beautifully  says, 
“ What  is  walking  as  He  walked,  except  the  despising  all  the  good 
things  which  He  despised,  not  to  fear  the  sufferings  He  endured,  to 
teach  what  He  taught,  to  hope  for  what  He  promised,  to  confer 
kindnesses  on  the  ungrateful,  not  to  requite  to  evil-wishers  according 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


LIKENESS  TO  CHRIST. 


3<39 

to  their  deserts,  to  pray  for  our  enemies,  to  pity  the  perverse, 
patiently  to  bear  with  the  crafty  and  proud,  and,  as  the  Apostle  says, 
to  die  to  the  flesh  that  we  may  live  to  Christ  ? ” &c. 

Whence  Gregory  Nyssen  defines  Christianity  to  be  an  imitation 
of  the  Divine  nature,  &c.  S.  Augustine  (de  Vera  Relig.  cap . xv.) 
tells  us  that  the  Word  was  made  flesh,  to  teach  us  the  way  of  life 
not  by  force  but  by  example,  in  ministering  to  the  poor,  in  refusing 
to  be  a king,  in  submitting  to  every  kind  of  injury,  &c.  In  fact,  His 
whole  life,  in  the  nature  He  deigned  to  assume,  was  a moral  discipline . 
S.  Cyprian  ( de  Zelo  et  Livore ),  “ If  parents  delight  in  having  children 
who  are  like  themselves,  much  more  does  God  rejoice  when  a man 
is  spiritually  bom ; and  again,  as  we  have  borne  the  image  of  the 
earthly,  let  us  also  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly.  But  we  cannot 
do  this  unless  we  exhibit  a resemblance  to  Christ ; for  this  is  to 
change  our  old  self,  and  to  begin  a new  life,  and  that  thus  the 
Divine  truth  may  shine  forth  in  thee,  as  He  Himself  promised,  ‘Those 
that  honour  Me,  I will  honour/  ” 

My  beloved \ I write  no  new  commandment  unto  you . This  com- 
mandment of  loving  God  and  our  neighbour  was  not  new,  for  it  was 
given  to  the  Jews,  and  before  that  to  Adam  and  all  men  by  the  Law 
of  Nature,  which  was  in  the  mind  of  God  from  all  eternity.  This 
was  an  answer  to  the  objection  made  to  the  Apostle’s  teaching,  that 
it  was  new  and  unheard  of.  It  was  again  an  old  commandment  as 
having  been  taught  Christians  from  their  very  baptism. 

Again , a new  commandment  J write  unto  you.  It  was  new,  as  being 
a new  enforcing  of  an  old  commandment,  which  had  been  forgotten 
by  long  disuse.  (See  John  xiii.  33.)  And  it  was  enforced  by  Christ 
on  the  new  principle  of  love,  and  also  more  fully  explained  (Matt  v. 
38;  John  xiv.  15,  16).  It  was  new  on  various  grounds — 1.  Because 
of  the  new  efficient  cause,  viz.  Christ,  who  enforced  it  more  stringently 
upon  us.  And  again,  by  reason  of  the  new  source  of  charity  and 
grace,  viz.,  the  Holy  Spirit  poured  forth  at  Pentecost  The  false 
interpretations  of  the  Jews  were  thus  put  aside,  and  a new  law,  and 
new  obligations  and  duties,  imposed  on  Christians.  See  Matt.  v.  43 

a.  It  was  a new  law ; by  reason  of  a new  material  cause,  viz.,  the 
vol.  v.  2 A 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


370  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C II. 


new  and  enlarged  body  of  Christians,  who  were  before  in  the  darkness 
of  unbelief  and  hatred,  but  who  were  now  bound  by  it  to  love  God 
and  their  neighbour. 

3.  There  was  a new  formal  cause,  namely,  the  Incarnation,  and 
the  union  of  all  Christians  in  Christ.  For  in  Christ  there  is  an 
union,  not  with  Christ  only,  but  with  all  Christians  in  Him,  an  union 
by  nature,  by  grace,  and  by  the  sacraments  (especially  by  the  Holy 
Eucharist),  which  is  the  foundation  of  a greater  and  singular  obliga- 
tion to  a stricter  love  of  God,  of  Christ,  and  of  all  Christians.  And 
this  is  a pure,  perfect  love,  in  so  much  as  Christ  is  far  above,  and 
more  perfect  than  other  men.  Moreover,  by  Christ’s  Incarnation 
we  owe  greater  love,  not  only  to  Christ,  but  also  to  the  whole  Trinity, 
by  reason  of  our  closer  union,  and  also  of  the  new  and  very  great 
blessings  conferred  on  us  thereby.  For  by  the  Incarnation  we  have 
a new  relation  and  union  to  the  Holy  Trinity,  and  also  between  our- 
selves, and  a new  cause  and  formal  reason  for  love.  For  by  the 
Incarnation  Christ  has  became  our  kinsman  and  brother,  so  that  we 
ought  mutually  to  love  each  other,  as  brethren  and  members  of  the 
one  body  of  Christ.  So  Toletus  and  F.  Lucas  on  John  xiii. 

4.  It  is  new , with  regard  to  the  example  Christ  has  set  us.  He 
poured  forth  His  blood  out  of  pure  love.  And  such  indeed  was  the 
love  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  and  the  early  Christians.  We  are  taught 
to  do  according  to  the  pattern  shewed  us  in  the  Mount  Christ  says, 
“As  I have  loved  you” — words  which  have  caused  much  matter 
for  shame,  and  also  much  matter  for  exaggeration  For  consider 
what  arguments  for  love  Christ  furnished  at  every  moment,  by  His 
birth,  His  labour,  His  preaching,  His  suffering,  His  dying,  ard  thus 
thou  wilt  see  how  little  is  the  love  of  all  men.  As  S.  John  the  Almoner, 
Bishop  of  Alexandria,  used  to  say  when  one  praised  his  liberality  to 
the  poor : " My  brother,  I have  not  yet  shed  my  life  for  thee,  as 
the  Lord  commanded  me.” 

We  are  therefore  taught  by  Christ  not  merely  to  love  our  neigh- 
bour as  ourselves,  but  even  more  than  ourselves.  For  Christ  died 
for  us  though  we  were  His  enemies,  teaching  us  to  do  the  same. 
This  was  an  unheard-of  love  both  among  the  Jews  and  the  world  at 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  NEW  COMMANDMENT. 


371 


large.  So  b.  Cyril,  in  John  xiii.,  S.  Chrysostom,  Theophylact, 
Rupertus.  Arias  [Montanus]  says,  that  our  love  should  be  most 
fervent,  and  abounding  in  kind  offices,  even  towards  our  enemies, 
and  ready  to  shed  our  blood  for  the  good  of  our  brethren,  as  Christ 
did.  So  Cajetan,  Gagneius,  S.  Major,  and  others. 

5.  In  regard  of  the  new  end  Christ  set  before  us,  He  wished  to 
make  us  heavenly  men,  and  not  earthly.  And  he  wished  us  to  renew 
our  love  by  frequent  communions,  sermons,  meditations,  &c.  S. 
John  in  his  old  age  used  frequently  to  repeat  and  inculcate  these 
words.  S.  Bernard  {Serin,  v.  in  Ceena  Dorn,)  : “ It  is  a new  command- 
ment because  it  makes  all  things  new,  putting  off  the  old  man  and 
putting  on  the  new,  and  by  daily  admitting  to  heaven  mankind  who 
were  banished  from  paradise.”  “ Is  it  not  a new  commandment,” 
says  S.  Augustine,  “ because  this  commandment  renews  those  who 
obey  it,  and  thus  makes  us  new  men,  heirs  of  the  New  Testament, 
singers  of  the  new  song,  making  and  gathering  into  one  a new 
people  ?”  S.  Gregory  {Horn,  xxxii.  in  Evang.)  says,  “ Our  Lord  and 
Redeemer  came  as  a new  man  into  the  world,  giving  us  new  precepts. 
For  since  our  old  life  was  brought  up  in  sin,  He  set  up  in  opposition 
to  it  newness  of  life,”  charity  as  opposed  to  concupiscence,  and  the 
love  of  God  and  our  neighbour  against  our  self-love. 

6.  Maldonatus  understands  by  ‘new*  something  excellent  and 
pre-eminent.  And  others  again  by  ‘ new * understand  a command- 
ment never  given  before,  as  men  were  called  ‘new'  who  were 
newly  made : and  * new  * also  because  Christ  wished  His  disciples 
to  observe  it  * anew/  as  being  the  last  He  gave  them.  As  F.  Lucas 
explains  it,  “I  have  reserved  this  commandment  to  you,  in  order 
that  ye  may  keep  it  more  firmly  in  your  memory.  For  I wish 
specially  to  commend  it  to  you,  being  such  a command  as  no  one 
ever  yet  gave  his  disciples,  being  a gentle  and  loving  command. 
It  was  ‘new’  then,  as  newly  enjoined  by  Christ  in  His  Last  Supper, 
and  as  being  a command  peculiar  to  Christ,  and  being  in  a singular 
manner  commended  by  Him.”  (See.  S.  Basil,  de  Bapt,  cap,  ult,) 

7.  It  was  ‘new*  with  respect  to  its  effects,  the  heroic  deeds 
of  S.  Paul  and  the  other  Apostles,  their  new  and  unheard-of  labours 


Digitized  by 


Got 


372  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  II. 


and  persecutions,  and  the  new  alacrity  and  ardour  with  which  they 
subdued  the  world  to  Christ  A love  which  led  Paul  to  wish  him- 
self accursed  for  the  sake  of  his  brethren,  which  caused  Paulinus  to 
sell  himself  into  slavery  for  the  sake  of  ransoming  the  son  of  a widow — 
a love  which  led  S.  Dominick,  S.  Francis,  S.  Ignatius  and  others 
to  devote  themselves  to  the  salvation  of  souls,  and  led  the  blessed 
Jacoponus  to  pray  that  he  might  suffer  all  the  sufferings  of  all  the 
lost,  that  he  might  save  them  all,  if  it  were  God’s  will. 

8.  It  was  a * new 1 commandment  as  specially  pertaining  to  the 
New  Testament,  and  distinguishing  it  from  the  Old.  See  John  xiiL 
35 ; Cant.  ii.  4,  viii.  6. 

Such  was  the  love  of  the  early  Christians.  See  Acts  iv.  32. 
“See  how  these  Christians  love  one  another,  and  are  ready  to  die 
for  each  other,”  was  remarked  by  the  heathen.  Tertullian  says  why 
they  called  each  other  brethren,  as  acknowledging  one  God  as  their 
father,  having  drunk  of  the  one  Spirit  of  holiness,  as  having  come 
from  the  same  womb  of  ignorance  to  the  same  Light  of  Truth,  &c. 

Which  thing  is  true  in  Him  and  in  you . Namely,  this  law  of 
love,  as  springing  from  the  Law  of  Nature,  and  it  is  not  only  the 
most  ancient  command,  but  is  true  also  in  you,  because  ye  have 
embraced  it  together  with  your  new  life  in  Christ.  But  some  refer 
this  to  Christ,  which  is  far  better.  For  though  He  is  not  expressly 
mentioned,  yet  He  was  mentioned  above  (ver  1-4).  But  S.  John’s 
heart  was  so  full  of  Christ,  that  when  he  says  ‘ Him,’  he  does  not 
mean  any  one  else,  but  Christ,  as  was  the  case  also  with  the  Mag- 
dalene (John  xx.  15).  S.  Jerome  (contra  Jovin , lib . 11)  accordingly 
reads,  “which  is  most  true  both  in  Christ  and  in  you.”  Some 
explain  it  thus,  “ This  law  of  charity  is  that  which  makes  you  to  be 
as  truly  in  Christ  as  ye  are  in  yourselves.”  2d.  We  may  explain  it 
thus  (and  it  is  the  best  meaning),  “ As  Christ  loves  Christians  in  the 
highest  degree  as  members  of  His  Body,  so  should  we  devote  our- 
selves entirely  to  the  love  of  Him  and  our  fellow-Christians.” 

Because  the  darkness  (of  ignorance,  lust,  and  sin,  as  well  as  of  the 
shadows,  the  terrors  and  ceremonies  of  the  Old  Testament)  is  pasty 
and  the  true  Light  now  shineth , the  light  of  faith,  grace,  love,  and  of 


'Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  DIVINE  LIGHT. 


373 


all  holiness.  See  Rom.  xiii.  12 ; Eph.  v.  6.  This  is  called  the  ‘true,’ 
i.e.  the  perfect,  full,  Divine  Light.  See  John  i.  9.  Christ  calls 
Himself  the  true  vine  (John  xv.  1)  and  the  true  head,  i.e.  fully 
satisfying  (John  vi.  55).  As  a symbol  of  this,  Christ  was  incarnate 
at  the  Vernal  Equinox,  and  was  born  at  the  Winter  Solstice,  when 
the  days  are  beginning  to  increase.  See  S.  Augustine,  Serm . xxii. 
de  temp . [not  S.  Augustine.] 

Ver.  9. — He  that  saith  he  is  in  the  Light  (of  the  Gospel,  Faith, 
and  Charity)  and  hateth  his  brother, , is  in  darkness , in  ignorance  of 
his  sins,  anger,  hatred,  lust,  &c.  And  by  these  he  is  so  blinded  as 
not  to  see  the  great  evil  of  hatred,  how  odious  to  God,  who  is  the 
light  of  Charity,  what  destruction  it  causes,  what  torments  of  hell 
it  brings  with  it.  “He  is  blinded  with  his  wickedness,”  says  S. 
Chrysostom  (de  Erudit.  discipl.) : “he  goes  ignorantly  into  hell-fire, 
and  is  hurled  headlong  into  punishments.”  See  Exodus  xi.  16.  And 
S.  Cyprian  (de  zelo  et  livore)  says : “ If  thou  hast  begun  to  be  a man 

of  light,  do  the  things  of  Christ,  for  He  is  our  Light  and  day.  Why 
rushest  thou  into  the  darkness  of  anger  ? Why  wrappest  thou  thy- 
self in  a mist  of  envy  ? Why  dost  thou  extinguish  with  the  darkness 
of  envy  every  spark  of  peace  and  charity  ? Why  dost  thou  go  back 
to  the  devil,  whom  thou  hast  renounced  ? Why  hast  thou  become 
like  Cain  ? Cain  ? He  is  in  the  darkness  of  hell,  because  he  is 
tending  towards  it.”  S.  Basil  says,  “ As  he  who  has  charity  has  God 
within  him,  so  he  that  has  hatred  and  anger  has  a devil  within  him,” 
&c.;  and  S.  Chrysostom  calls  anger  a self-chosen  (voluntarium)  devil. 
In  an  angry  man  you  may  see  all  the  furies  of  hell.  As  Seneca 
says  (lib.  ii.  de  Ira). 

Even  until  now . For  though  baptism  be  an  enlightenment,  yet  it 
cannot  dispel  the  darkness  of  hatred,  if  it  be  voluntary,  or  come  on 
after  baptism.  (See  S.  Augustine,  Bede,  and  Hugo.) 

Ver.  10. — He  that  loveth  his  brother  abideth  in  the  light  (of  faith  and 
love:  this  is  an  antithesis  to  the  former  verse),  and  there  is  no 
occasion  for  stumbling  in  him.  S.  Jerome  (in  Matt  xxv.)  explains  the 
words  vtfexofAfAa  and  exavdaXov.  This  may  be  taken  to  have  either 
an  active  or  a passive  meaning,  the  giving  of  offence,  or  the  taking 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


374  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  II. 

of  offence.  See  i Cor.  xiii.  4;  Prov.  xv.  19;  Ps.  cxix.  165.  One 
who  loves  neither  gives  offence,  nor  takes  it:  “If  my  brother 
offends  me,”  they  would  say,  “shall  I abandon  charity?  Far  from 
it : I will  overcome  evil  with  good,  I will  follow  Christ,  I will  show 
him  how  I love  the  brethren,  how  I love  God.  I will  not  fight 
against  my  brother  who  has  wronged  me.  I will  rather  fight  against 
his  disease  of  mind,  and  drown  his  anger  and  ill-will  with  floods  ot 
charity.”  S.  Augustine  says  (in  loc.),  “Who  are  they  who  either 
take  or  make  offence?  They  who  are  offended  at  Christ  or  the 
Church.  They  who  are  offended  in  Christ  are  burnt  as  by  the  sun, 
they  who  are  offended  in  the  Church  are  burnt  as  by  the  moon. 
But  the  Psalm  says  (cxxii.  6),  ‘ the  sun  shall  not  burn  thee  by  day, 
nor  the  moon  by  night,*  that  is,  if  thou  holdest  fast  by  charity  thou 
wilt  suffer  no  offence  either  in  Christ  or  the  Church,  and  thou  wilt 
forsake  neither  Christ  nor  the  Church.**  A passage  is  here  added 
from  a sermon  once  supposed  to  be  S.  Augustine’s,  but  subsequently 
regarded  as  spurious,  as  is  also  another  sermon  quoted  just  after- 
wards, showing  who  are  true  and  who  are  false  friends,  and  that  those 
who  seem  to  be  our  enemies  are  in  truth  our  best  friends,  and  to 
be  regarded  as  such.  And  S.  Basil  (-Reg.  brev \ clxxvi.)  says  the  same. 

Ver.  11. — But  he  that  hateth  his  brother  is  in  darkness . For,  as 
(Ecumenius  says,  “ He  cannot  be  in  the  light  of  Christ,  who  hateth 
him  for  whom  Christ  died.** 

And  knoweth  not  whither  he goeth.  “For  (as  says  S.  Cyprian,  de 
Zelo)  he  goes  down  to  hell,  ignorantly  and  blindly,  and  withdrawn 
from  the  light  of  Christ,  who  says,  * I am  the  Light  of  the  world.*  ** 
“ Hatred,**  says  the  author  of  Imperf.  Homily  xiii.  [on  S.  Matt.]  “is 
the  spirit  of  darkness,  and  wherever  it  settles  it  defiles  the  purity 
of  holiness ; **  and  adds,  “ The  world  is  so  full  of  offences,  that  if  we 
wish  to  love  our  friends  only,  we  shall  not  find  anything  to  love.” 
See  Prov.  iv.  19;  Zeph.  i.  17;  and  Isa.  lix.  10.  For  in  truth 
nothing  so  blinds  our  reason  as  hatred.  “There  is  no  difference 
between  anger  and  madness,**  says  S.  Chrysostom  on  S.  John 
(Horn,  xlvii.) 

And  anger  is  so  blind  as  not  to  see  its  own  blindness.  Seneca 


— Diqitij§d  by  GOOglC 


MEANING  OF  “ LITTLE  CHILDREN.” 


375 


adduces  the  case  of  Harpasto,  his  wife's  handmaid  (Ep.  11),  who 
did  not  understand  that  she  was  blind,  adding,  “No  one  admits 
that  he  is  covetous,  or  ambitious,  or  angry.  I have  not  settled  on 
my  course  of  life  (he  says),  it  is  our  youth  that  causes  it  But  why 
do  we  deceive  ourselves  ? The  evil  is  not  without  us,  but  within 
us,  and  therefore  we  find  it  hard  to  regain  our  health,  because  we 
know  not  that  we  are  ill.”  Democritus  blinded  himself  by  looking 
at  the  sun,  in  order  that  he  might  not  see  the  happiness  of  the 
wicked.  And  in  like  manner  do  the  envious  and  malicious  blind 
themselves. 

Ver.  1 1. — I write  unto  you , little  children . Commending  what  he 
had  said  to  the  several  grades  whom  he  addressed.  He  places  them 
in  three  classes  according  to  their  respective  ages.  He  congratulates 
them  on  the  gift  of  the  Gospel  which  they  had  received,  and  exhorts 
them  to  persevere  and  make  progress  therein.  The  children  repre- 
sent beginners  or  neophytes ; young  men,  those  who  are  advancing ; 
the  old  men,  those  who  are  perfect  And  he  thus  suggests  that 
Christians  should  advance  in  virtue,  as  they  advance  in  years. 
Clemens,  (Ecumenius,  and  others  take  this  view,  though  S.  Augustine 
holds  that  these  three  terms  apply  equally  to  all  classes ; that  they 
are  called  children  as  having  been  new-born  in  baptism,  fathers  as 
acknowledging  Christ  as  their  Father  and  the  Ancient  of  Days,  and 
youths  because  they  are  strong.  But  the  first  meaning  seems  the 
simplest.  Because  your  sins,  into  which  ye  are  likely  to  fall,  are 
forgiven  you , in  baptism,^/*  His  Namds  sake,  i.e.  for  Christ's  sake, 
or  else  by  our  calling  on  Christ's  Name,  or  else  by  the  authority 
and  power  of  Christ  For  by  this  are  sins  remitted  through  His 
grace  and  merits. 

Morally.  S.  John  here  teaches  that  great  care  must  be  taken  in 
training  children.  (He  here  gives  as  an  instance  the  case  of  the 
youth  whom  he  entrusted  to  a Bishop.)  For  the  whole  regulation 
of  our  life  depends  on  our  childhood's  training.  S.  Ignatius  accor- 
dingly founded  schools  for  such  training.  See  Rebadeneira  in  his 
life  (lib.  iii.  cap . 24),  where  he  quotes  many  Fathers,  Councils,  and 
Philosophers. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


376  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  II. 


Mystically . S.  Augustine  (de  Vera  Relig.  cap.  26)  describes  the 
seven  ages  of  a righteous  man.  He  first  drinks  in  the  lessons  and 
examples  of  history — next  he  forgets  things  of  earth,  and  reaches 
after  things  divine,  and  strives  after  the  highest  and  unchanging 
rule  of  life,  by  the  steps  of  wisdom — next  he  proceeds  more  boldly, 
wedding  his  carnal  appetite  to  the  strength  of  reason,  and  rejoicing 
within  with  a kind  of  conjugal  joy,  when  the  soul  is  united  to  the 
mind,  and  is  so  covered  with  the  veil  of  modesty  as  no  longer  to  be 
compelled  to  live  rightly,  but  even  not  to  delight  in  sin,  though  all 
might  allow  it  And  fourthly,  he  acts  thus  in  a more  bold  and 
orderly  manner,  shining  forth  into  the  perfect  man,  and  becoming 
more  capable  of  bearing  all  the  persecutions  and  tempests  of  this 
world  and  even  breaking  their  force.  Fifthly,  to  be  calm  and  tran- 
quil, in  every  respect  enjoying  to  the  full  the  highest  and  ineffable 
wisdom ; and  sixthly,  a thorough  turning  to  the  life  eternal,  and  a 
complete  obliviousness  to  this  temporal  life,  and  a passing  on  to  the 
perfect  image  and  likeness  of  God.  The  seventh  age  is  that  of 
eternal  rest,  which  is  not  distinguished  by  any  different  stages  of 
growth. 

Ver.  13. — I write  unto  youy  fathers , because  ye  have  known  Him 
who  is  from  the  beginning . Fathers,  we  know,  are  proud  of  their 
experience  ; and  therefore  he  fitly  congratulates  them  on  having 
known  the  Ancient  of  Days,  who  is  from  eternity.  For,  as  S.  Augus- 
tine says,  “ Christ  is  new  in  the  flesh,  but  ancient  in  His  Godhead.” 
He  adds,  “Remember,  ye  who  are  fathers,  if  ye  forget  Him  who  is 
from  the  beginning,  ye  have  lost  your  fatherhood.” 

1 write  unto  you , young  meny  because  ye  have  overcome  the  wicked 
one.  He  passes  to  that  stage  of  life  which  rejoices  in  its  strength, 
and  is  full  of  concupiscence.  He  congratulates  them  for  having 
overcome  the  wicked  one,  for  he  is  speaking  to  Christian  young 
people  living  in  a Christian  way,  as  S.  Agnes,  S.  Lucy,  S.  Agatha, 
and  many  others,  or  that  young  man  of  whom  S.  Jerome  speaks  (in 
the  life  of  Paul  the  first  hermit),  who  when  tempted  by  a harlot  to 
sin,  bit  off  his  tongue,  and  spat  it  in  her  face,  and  thus  by  the  inten- 
sity of  the  pain  overcame  the  feeling  of  lust.  This  strength  and  this 


~~Digiti2ffr  by  (jOO^Ic 


KNOWING  THE  FATHER. 


377 


victory  was  prompted  by  Christ.  See  i Cor.  xv.  57.  AndS.  Augus- 
tine (in.  loc.)  says,  “If  the  wicked  one  is  overcome  by  the  young 
men,  He  is  fighting  with  us.  He  fights,  but  he  does  not  overcome. 
Is  it  because  we  are  strong,  or  because  He  is  strong  in  us,  who  in 
the  hands  of  His  persecutors  was  found  weak  ? He  hath  made  us 
strong  who  resisted  not  His  persecutors,  for  He  was  crucified  in 
weakness,  but  liveth  by  the  power  of  God.”  (2  Cor.  xiiL  4.) 

Ver.  14. — I write  unto  you , children.  He  here  comes  round  and 
says  the  same  thing  in  other  words,  to  enforce  it  the  more,  calling 
them  r%xd*  in  the  first  instance,  and  vatdia  here. 

Because  ye  have  known  the  Father ; by  the  words  of  the 
Creed. 

Morally , Catherinus  beautifully  says,  “ The  life  of  beginners  is  to 
be,  in  a sense,  under  Him,  who  by  cherishing  us  in  His  paternal 
embraces  and  allurements,  keeps  away  from  us  for  a while  sharper 
temptations.  But  He  afterwards  hands  us  over  to  the  Son,  for  our 
growth  and  fuller  instruction,  and  at  last  to  the  Holy  Spirit  to  be 
strengthened  and  perfected.” 

Here  in  some  MSS.  the  exhortation  to  fathers  is  repeated.  F. 
Lucas  notices  its  omission  in  the  Complut  Polyglott  and  in  the 
Vulgate,  and  asks  why  it  is  omitted  ? Is  it  because  a single  admoni- 
tion was  enough  for  the  aged  ? 

I write  to  you , young  men , because  ye  are  strong,  and  have  overcome 
the  wicked  one . Him  who  is  the  chief  and  head  of  all  malignity. 
“Consider,”  says  S.  Augustine  (in.  loc.)y  “that  ye  are  young,  fight 
that  ye  may  overcome  again  and  again,  overcome  that  ye  may  be 
crowned.  Be  lowly,  that  ye  fall  not  in  the  fight.”  And  again,  “ This 
is  a great  commendation  of  grace,  that  it  instructs  the  hearts  of  the 
humble,  but  stops  the  mouths  of  the  proud.” 

And  the  word  of  God  abideth  in  you . Ye  keep  that  word  which 
we  and  our  fellows  have  preached.  Others  understand  it  of  the 
Uncreate  and  Eternal  Word.  Ye  have  remained  stedfast  in  the 
faith,  and  have  thus  overcome  the  wicked  one.  As  CEcumenius  says, 
“ In  promising  youths  and  young  men  (strong  as  they  may  be  and 
needing  to  be  trained  for  war)  the  glory  of  victory,  he  shows  that 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


378  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN.  C.  II. 


they  require  to  be  addressed  in  noble  and  warlike  terms.”  And 
S.  Prosper  ( Epist . ad  Demetriad  in  S.  Ambrose  Ep . iv.  33)  says,  “ Our 
will  is  aided  by  the  operation  of  the  Spirit,  but  is  not  done  away 
with.  The  effect  of  grace  is  this,  that  our  will,  corrupted  as  it  is  by 
sin,  beside  itself  with  vanities,  surrounded  by  corruptions,  entangled 
with  difficulties,  should  not  remain  in  this  feeble  state,  but  should  be 
cured  and  regain  its  strength  by  the  aid  of  the  All-compassionate 
Physician.”  And  again,  “ The  crafty  tempter  is  ever  on  the  watch, 
that,  as  our  devotion  increases,  pride  should  steal  in,  and  a man 
should  glory  in  himself,  rather  than  in  God,  for  the  good  that  is  in 
him.  The  Apostle  tells  us  to  work  out  our  salvation  with  fear  and 
trembling.  And  accordingly  the  more  we  advance  in  holiness,  the 
greater  reason  we  have  for  fear  and  trembling,  lest  the  mind,  con- 
scious of  its  progress,  should  be  hurried  into  excess  of  pride,  and 
thus  become  defiled  by  vanity,  while  it  seems  to  itself  to  be  resplen- 
dent in  virtue.” 

Ver.  15. — Love  not  the  world  “There  are  two  loves,”  says  S. 
Augustine  (in.  loc.)t  “ the  love  of  God  and  the  love  of  the  world. 
If  the  love  of  the  world  occupy  the  heart,  there  is  no  room  for  the 
love  of  God  to  enter.  Let  the  love  of  the  world  retire,  let  the  love 
of  God  enter  in ; let  the  better  have  its  own  place.  Thou  lovedst 
the  world  : love  it  no  more.  When  thou  hast  drained  out  the  love 
of  the  world  from  thy  heart,  thou  shalt  drink  in  love  divine,  and 
then  shall  charity  begin  to  dwell  in  thee,  from  whence  nothing  evil 
can  proceed.”  “It  is,”  he  proceeds,  “as  clearing  a field  before 
planting  fresh  trees.” 

The  Abbot  Isaias  (de  Poenit . Orat.  xxi.)  answered  the  question, 
“ What  is  the  world  ? ” in  this  way.  “ It  is  a fatal  rushing  into  sin — 
doing  what  is  contrary  to  nature — fulfilling  the  desires  of  the  flesh — 
thinking  we  shall  live  here  for  ever,  the  caring  more  for  the  body 
than  for  the  soul — glorying  in  things  which  perish.”  As  the  Apostle 
John  says,  “ Love  not  the  world,”  &c.  As  S.  Augustine  says,  “In 
this  vale  of  misery  thou  should st  not  possess  anything  so  beautiful, 
or  so  delightful,  as  to  fully  occupy  your  mind.  Shun  the  world,  if 
thou  wishest  not  to  be  worldly . If  thou  art  not  worldly,  the  world 


DigitftdbyGoC 


MEANING  OF  THE  “ WORLD.” 


379 


delighteth  thee  not.  Avoid  the  creatures  if  thou  desirest  to  have 
the  Creator.  Let  every  creature  be  vile  in  thy  sight,  that  the  Creator 
may  be  sweet  in  thy  heart” 

If  any  one  love  the  world , the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him . See 
James  iv.  4.  “ We  must  not  give  half  our  heart  to  God,  and  half  to 

the  world.”  As  S.  Leo  says  (Serm,  v.  de  Jejun.  7 Mensis) : “There  are 
two  loves  ...  for  the  rational  soul  loves  either  God  or  the  world. 
There  can  be  no  excess  in  the  love  of  God.  But  in  the  love  of  the 
world  all  things  are  hurtful.  And  therefore  we  must  firmly  cleave 
to  eternal  goods,  but  use  worldly  goods  only  by  the  way,  and  since 
we  are  pilgrims,  and  hastening  to  return  to  our  country,  we  must  use 
the  good  things  of  this  world  as  food  for  our  journey  through  it,  and 
not  as  an  allurement  to  abide  in  it.” 

Ver.  16. — For  all  that  is  in  the  world  is  the  lust  of  the  fleshy  the 
lust  of  the  eye , and  the  pride  of  life.  You  will  say  that  these  properly 
are  not  in  the  world,  but  in  the  souls  of  men  who  desire  them.  But 
I answer,  the  word  world  is  used  in  a threefold  sense. 

1.  For  men  of  the  world,  see  John  i.  10,  xvi.  18 ; and  S.  Augus- 
tine on  Ps.  lv.,  “ the  wicked  and  ungodly  in  the  world,”  in  which 
sense  S.  John  uses  it  in  his  Gospel. 

2.  It  means  this  created  world,  in  which,  as  being  inanimate, 
there  is  not,  properly  speaking,  any  concupiscence.  But  these  are 
provocatives  of  concupiscence.  For  everything  we  see  affects  our 
senses  and  lures  us  on  to  love  it 

3.  It  signifies  a worldly  life,  consisting  in  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  the 
lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  pride  of  life.  It  is  the  whole  body  of  sin 
consisting  of  these  several  parts  or  members.  As  S.  Antony  of 
Padua  said,  “ The  earth  is  avarice,  water  is  luxury,  the  air  is  incon- 
stancy, fire  is  pride.”  These  three  kinds  of  concupiscence  are 
embraced  in  the  general  term  concupiscence.  As  is  added,  “ It  is 
not  of  the  Father  but  of  the  world.” 

The  world  can  be  taken  in  all  these  senses,  and  S.  John  first 
takes  up  one  and  then  another. 

But  the  second  of  these  meanings  is  most  to  the  point.  And  S. 
John  wishes  to  withdraw  the  minds  of  the  faithful  from  all  objects  of 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


380  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  II. 


desire  which  the  world  contains  (for  they  are  the  roots  of  every  evil), 
and  to  fix  them  on  God. 

All  these  worldly  things  estrange  our  hearts  from  the  love  of  God, 
and  relate  only  to  the  perishing  goods  of  the  world,  or  rather  to  the 
shadows  and  phantoms  of  good. 

Here  notice  that  as  the  lust  of  the  eyes  is  avarice,  so  that  which 
creates  the  desire  is  gold,  silver,  jewels,  &c.  As  S.  Augustine  says 
(Lib.  iii.  de  Syntb.  cap . i.),  “To  the  lust  of  the  flesh  belong  the 
allurements  of  pleasure  ; to  the  lust  of  the  eye,  foolish  spectacles ; to 
the  ambition  of  the  world,  the  madness  of  pride.”  It  is  called  the 
lust  of  the  eyes,  because  it  provokes  the  eyes,  and  through  the  eyes 
the  fancy  andt  he  mind.  “ The  eyes,”  says  S.  Augustine  in  Ps.  xli., 
“are  members  of  the  body,  the  windows  of  the  mind.  It  is  the 
inner  man  who  sees  by  their  means.”  The  covetous  lays  up  riches, 
he  does  not  spend  them,  and  his  only  pleasure  is  looking  at  them. 
An  exceeding  wretchedness  and  fatuity.  For  he  might  just  as  well 
look  at  the  gold,  silver,  and  jewels  in  the  temples,  and  feed  himself 
on  them.  Whereas  he  would  feed  himself  the  more  with  his  own 
wealth,  and  enjoy  it  the  more,  if  he  expended  it  on  his  friends  and 
the  poor. 

2.  As  the  lust  of  the  flesh  is  gluttony,  so  is  it  wine,  delicate  and 
sensual  pleasure,  which  provoke  it.  It  hence  appears  how  vile  it  is, 
as  being  common  to  the  beasts ; how  little,  because  it  feeds  not  the 
mind,  but  the  flesh  alone ; short-lived,  perishing  in  the  very  act,  and 
bringing  after  it  foul  and  filthy  diseases.  Whence  S.  Augustine  (de 
Vera.  Rdig.  cap.  lv.)  says,  “Let  us  not  delight  in  corrupting  or 
being  corrupted  by  carnal  pleasure,  lest  we  should  come  at  last  to 
the  more  miserable  corruption  of  pain  and  suffering.” 

3.  As  the  pride  of  life  is  ambition,  haughtiness,  desire  of  pre- 
eminence and  glory,  so  are  its  provocatives  superb  dresses,  grand 
houses,  attendants,  carriages,  &c  We  speak  of  being  as  proud  as  a 
peacock,  who  spreads  its  wings  and  struts  along.  S.  Bernard  (on 
Ps.  xi.  Serm.  vi.)  says,  “ Ambition  is  a subtle  evil,  a secret  poison,  a 
hidden  pest,  the  contriver  of  craft,  the  parent  of  hypocrisy,  the  fruit 
of  envy,  the  source  of  sin,  the  fosterer  of  crime,  the  destroyer  (cerugo) 


Digifizecl  by 


Googk 


CONCUPISCENCE. 


381 


of  virtues,  the  devourer  of  sanctity,  the  blinder  of  hearts,  generating 
disease  from  the  very  remedies,  and  sickness  from  that  which  should 
heal.”  S.  Basil  terms  it  the  “ whetstone  of  wickedness.”  See  S# 
Gregory,  Mor \ xxxiv.  14,  xxxi.  17.  These  three  passions  are  the 
threefold  sources  of  all  temptations  and  sin.  See  S.  Augustine, 
Confess . x.  30.  S.  Thomas,  i.  2,  q.  lxxv.  art  5.  As  the  Poet  says : — 

“ Ambition,  wealth,  and  foul  desires, 

These  three  as  gods  the  world  admires.” 

Our  first  parents  were  tempted  by  them,  and  so  was  our  Lord.  See 
S.  Augustine,  de  Vera  Relig.  cap.  xxxviiL 

This  threefold  desire  is  opposed  to  the  Holy  Trinity.  Avarice  to 
the  Father,  who  is  most  liberal  in  communicating  His  essence  and 
all  His  attributes  to  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit  essentially,  but  to 
creatures  only  by  way  of  participation.  The  lust  of  the  flesh  is 
opposed  to  the  Son,  who  was  begotten  not  carnally  but  spiritually 
from  the  mind  of  the  Father,  and  who  hates  all  carnal  impurity. 
The  pride  of  life  is  opposed  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  is  the  Spirit  of 
humility  and  gentleness.  Again,  it  is  opposed  to  the  three  primary 
virtues,  as  lust  of  the  flesh  to  continence,  lust  of  the  eyes  to  charity 
and  kindness,  pride  of  life  to  humility.  (See  S.  Bernard,  Serm.  i.  in 
Octav.  Pasch . and  de  diligendo  Deo). 

Which  is  not  of  the  Father , but  is  of  the  world . This  refers  not 
merely  to  the  pride  of  life,  but  to  the  threefold  lust  just  spoken  of. 
Moreover,  concupiscence  or  lust  comes  from  the  world,  from  the  cor- 
ruption and  vice  of  those  who  cleave  to  the  world.  Just  as  the  word 
‘ flesh ’ signifies  in  Scripture  the  corruption  of  the  flesh,  so  in  like 
manner  does  ‘world  ’ signify  here  the  corrupt  manners  and  lust  of 
worldly  men. 

The  reason  is  that  concupiscence  arises  from  a worldly  life.  Good 
things  become  objects  of  desire,  by  reason  of  man’s  concupiscence. 
For  before  the  Fall  there  were  no  objects  for  concupiscence,  but 
man’s  fall  caused  them  to  be  such.  And  it  is  from  hence  that  we 
derive  our  concupiscence  together  with  original  sin,  and  accordingly 
all  the  things  that  God  gave  for  the  good  of  man  are  now  become 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


382  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  II. 


allurements  and  excitements  of  concupiscence,  when  we  see  after 
and  desire  them  immoderately.  See  Wisdom  xiv.  n,  iv.  12.  For  the 
pleasure  which  arises  from  desire  fascinates  the  mind,  and  prevents 
its  seeing  the  filthiness  and  the  punishment  of  sin,  or  the  beauty  and 
rewards  of  virtue.  See  James  i.  14.  (Ecumenius  understands  by 
the  * world*  Satan  himself — “as  Christ  said  to  the  Jews,  Ye  are  of 
your  father  the  devil,  that  is  devoted  to  worldly  pursuits,  the  seeds 
of  which  the  devil  sows  within  us  * — who  accordingly  is  called  the 
Prince  of  this  world.  See  John  xi.  31,  xiv.  30,  xvi.  n. 

Ver.  17. — And  the  world  passeth  away  and  the  lust  thereof.  See 
Matt.  xxiv.  35 ; 1 Cor.  vii.  31 ; 2.  Pet.  iii.  11.  See  also  Wisdom  v.  7 ; 
S.  Bernard,  Epist.  cvii.,  &c. 

As  S.  Jerome  says  {Epist.  iii.) : “ If  we  were  granted  the  years 

of  Methusalem,  yet  the  previous  length  would  be  nothing  when  it 
ceased  to  be,  for  when  the  end  of  life  arrives,  there  will  be  no 
difference  between  the  child  of  ten  and  the  man  of  a thousand  years, 
except  that  the  old  man  goes  out  of  life  bearing  a heavier  burden  of 
sin.”  S.  Cyprian  (ad Demetriad)  shows  at  great  length  that  the  world  is 
growing  old  : “ The  labourer  is  failing  in  the  field,  the  mariner  at  sea, 
the  soldier  in  camp,  honesty  in  the  market,  justice  in  the  courts, 
firmness  in  friendships,  skill  in  arts,  discipline  in  morals,  for  the 
sentence  has  been  passed  on  the  world  that  all  things  born  should 
die,  all  things  which  have  grown  up  should  wax  old,  strong  things 
should  become  weak,  great  things  become  small,  and  when  they 
are  thus  weakened  and  diminished  they  come  to  an  end.”  And 
S.  Anselm,  in  Rom.  xii.,  says,  “ Be  not  constant  in  love  for  the  world, 
for,  since  that  which  thou  lovest  abideth  not,  it  is  in  vain  for  thee  to 
fix  thy  heart  firmly  on  it,  while  that  which  thou  lovest  is  flying  away.” 
This  is  the  reason  a posteriori ; but  the  a priori  reason  is  that  the  world 
is  created  from  nothing,  and  therefore  tends  to  become  nothing, 
returning  to  that  from  whence  it  came.  But,  on  the  other  hand, 
eternity  belongs  only  to  God,  He  having  an  uncreated,  unchangeable, 
and  eternal  nature.  Again,  the  world  is  not  simple,  but  compounded 
of  various  elements ; but  everything  which  is  so  composed  is  resolved 
into  its  own  elements  or  component  parts.  And  the  final  cause  of 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


WHAT  LOVE  DOES. 


383 


its  being  so  is  that  we  should  turn  our  thoughts  from  transient  and 
changing  creatures  to  the  Creator,  who  is  unchangeable,  and  always 
the  same.  All  creatures  silently  proclaim  this  by  their  changeable- 
ness, and  our  own  heart  also,  as  S.  Augustine  says  ( Confess . i.  1), 
“ Thou  hast  made  us,  O Lord,  for  Thyself,  and  our  heart  is  restless 
till  it  rests  in  Thee.”  S.  John  adds, 

But  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for  ever . Because  the 
soul  which  doeth  the  will  of  God  will,  on  leaving  the  body,  be 
blessed  for  ever,  and  the  body  will  after  death  rise  immortal  and 
glorious.  See  Ps.  cxix.  96,  and  John  v.  52.  The. reason  is  that  love, 
like  the  chameleon,  conforms  the  one  who  loves  into  the  pattern  of 
the  thing  which  he  loves,  love  being  an  impulse  of  the  mind,  and  a 
going  out  of  itself  towards  the  beloved  object,  whereas  understanding 
and  knowledge  are,  on  the  contrary,  the  entering  of  the  thing  which 
is  known  into  the  understanding  which  embraces  it  As  S. 
Augustine  says,  “ Every  one  is  like  the  object  he  loves.  Thou  lovest 
the  earth : thou  wilt  be  earthy.  Thou  lovest  God.  What  shall  I 
say?  Wilt  thou  be  God?  I dare  not  say  it  of  myself.  Let  us 
hear  the  scriptures,  ‘I  have  said  ye  are  gods,  and  are  all  the 
children  of  the  Most  Highest/  If  then  ye  wish  to  be  gods  and  sons 
of  the  Most  Highest,  love  not  the  world,  nor  the  things  that  are  in 
the  world.”  The  object  which  is  here  loved  is  God,  and  the  will 
of  God  which  is  stable  and  eternal,  and  therefore  he  that  loveth  it 
becomes  eternal.  See  Hos.  ix.  io,  and  Sam.  i.  8,  and  note.  Dost 
thou  wish  to  be  eternal  ? love  eternal  good.  Dost  thou  wish  to  enjoy 
for  ever  the  beloved  object?  Love  that  which  is  eternal.  For  if 
thou  lovest  a perishable  thing,  thou  wilt  perish  together  with  it. 
But  if  thou  fixest  thy  mind  on  an  object  which  is  stable,  heavenly, 
divine,  and  eternal,  thou  wilt  become  the  same.  This  is  true 
wisdom,  the  wisdom  of  Saints.  Fools  then  are  lovers  of  the  world, 
who  in  the  place  of  these  love  transitory  and  perishable  things,  and 
accordingly  they  pass  away,  and  in  truth  perish  with  them  for  ever. 
“ O ye  sons  of  men , why  do  ye  love  vanity  and  seek  after  a lie? ” 
(Ps.  4.)  Why  follow  ye  after — not  real  things,  but — the  empty  and 
fleeting  shadows  of  things?  Ye  cannot  grasp  a shadow,  nor  yet 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


384  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  II. 

hold  fast  shadowy  wealth  and  honours.  Grant  us,  Lord,  this 
wisdom,  “ that  among  all  the  changes  of  the  world  our  hearts  may 
there  be  fixed  where  there  are  true  joys.”  S.  Augustine  says  beauti- 
fully (in  loc.),  “Why  should  not  I love  that  which  God  made? 
But  what  dost  thou  wish  ? to  love  temporal  things,  and  to  pass  away 
with  them,  or  not  to  love  the  world,  and  to  live  for  ever  with  God  ? ” 
He  then  compares  lovers  of  the  world  to  a bride  who  loves  the 
ring  her  husband  has  given  her,  more  than  she  does  her  husband 
himself ; which  is  assuredly  a spurious  love,  since  he  gave  it  in 
order  that  he  might  be  loved  in  his  gift  God  gave  thee  all  these 
things : love  Him  that  made  them.  He  wishes  to  give  thee  some- 
thing more,  namely  Himself ; but  if  thou  lovest  these  things  (though 
God  made  them)  and  neglectest  thy  Maker,  and  lovest  the  world, 
will  it  not  be  regarded  as  a spurious  love  ? 

And  Didymus  says,  “ Whosoever  despises  all  things  will  be  above 
the  world.  For  righteousness  endureth  for  ever,  for  it  is  so  written.J> 
See  also  Prov.  x.  25.  The  old  Philosophers  had  some  shadowy 
notion  of  this.  See  Seneca,  Ep . lix. 

My  little  children,  this  is  the  last  hour  The  time  is  now  at  hand 
for  the  coming  of  Antichrist,  as  ye  have  often  heard.  Many  anti- 
christs have  already  come,  which  is  a sign  that  the  world  is  waxing 
old,  and  that  your  life  in  it  cannot  be  long.  Tear  your  mind  away 
from  the  world,  its  vain  and  perishing  pleasures,  fix  it  entirely  on 
heavenly  and  eternal  things,  and  on  God  Himself  (see  Rom.  xiii.  n). 
And  be  also  on  your  strict  guard  against  all  heretics  and  impostors. 
For  this,  says  CEcumenius  and  Didymus  very  properly,  leads  every 
one  to  think  about  his  own  end  as  if  his  own  last  hour  were  at  hand, 
and  thus  sobriety  and  purity  of  living  prevail  among  Christians. 
See  i.  Pet.  iii.  14. 

By  the  last  hour  is  meant  the  last  age  of  the  world.  See  S. 
Augustine,  Ep.  lxxx.  to  Hesychius . It  is  the  last  age  in  regard  to 
the  duration  of  the  world  and  its  division  into  the  three  parts  of  the 
law  of  Nature,  the  law  of  Moses,  and  the  law  of  grace,  after  which  no 
other  law  or  state  is  to  be  looked  for,  as  the  Jews  still  expect  their 
Messiah. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  END  OF  THE  WORLD. 


385 


(Ecumenius  (after  S.  Chrysostom)  adds  it  may  mean  the  ‘ worst  * 
age,  as  we  say  of  a sick  man  that  he  is  in  extremis . And  so  too  Ribera 
(in  Heb.  ix.  num . cxiii.  seq.)  says,  that  it  is  the  time  of  impostors 
and  heretics.  This  exposition  is  most  fitting  and  appropriate.  So 
says  the  Gloss,  Cajetan,  Dionysius,  and  others. 

But  the  word  must  be  taken  in  a very  wide  sense.  Some  wrongly 
conjecture  that  as  the  first,  under  the  law  of  nature,  lasted  for  2000 
years,  and  so  also  the  second  period  under  the  law,  that  it  will  be 
the  same  under  the  Gospel.  The  early  Christians  considered  that 
Nero  was  Antichrist,  and  S.  Cyprian  thought  that  the  end  of  the  world 
was  near  in  his  time.  See  Epist.  lib . iv.  6 ; and  so  too  S.  Jerome,  de 
Monog,  ; S.  Gregory,  Epist  iv.  38 ; and  Lactantius,  lib . vil  cap,  25. 
See  notes  on  Rev.  xx. 

The  word  * hour } is  used  indefinitely.  The  phrase  was  familiar  to 
S.  John,  who  called  the  period  an  ‘ hour,*  because  it  was  very  short 
But  in  classic  authors  it  signifies  a period  of  time  of  any  length,  a 
season,  e.g,,  as  well  as  the  hour  of  the  day.  See  Is.  xxxviii.  8. 

Morally . Hence  learn  the  shortness  of  life.  For  if  this  age  of 
the  world  is  only  an  hour,  what  a very  small  part  of  it  is  the  life  of 
any  one ! We  are  all  creatures  of  an  hour.  The  old  have  but  a part 
of  an  hour  to  live ; the  young  hope  for  a whole  hour,  but  yet  are  cut 
off  in  its  very  beginning.  As  S.  Jerome  says,  " A youth  may  die 
soon,  an  old  man  cannot  live  very  long.” 

This  word  then  warns  us  to  be  very  diligent  in  employing  the 
time  which  is  allotted  us.  Suppose  a physician  or  a judge  were  to 
tell  you  to  prepare  to  die — “ you  will  certainly  die  an  hour  hence,” 
how  anxiously  would  you  clear  your  conscience,  what  acts  of  con- 
trition and  charity  would  you  exercise,  how  would  you  expend  all 
your  goods  in  good  works.  Do  the  same  now,  for  your  life  is  but  an 
hour.  Or  again,  you  are  afflicted,  are  sick,  are  calumniated.  Wait 
a while.  It  is  but  for  an  hour,  and  after  that  you  pass  to  a blessed 
eternity.  See  1 Cor.  L 29.  Melania,  a very  wealthy  noble  lady, 
persuaded  her  people,  by  this  text  of  S.  John,  to  sell  all  they  had,  and 
to  go  to  the  Holy  Land.  For  she  used  frequently  to  say  (as  indeed 

she  thought)  that  the  world  was  about  to  perish.  She  went  to 
vol.  v,  29 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


3 86  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  c.  II. 

Jerusalem,  and  died  forty  days  after,  and  the  Barbarians  laid  waste 
the  city.  This  took  place  under  Alaric,  a.d.  41a 

S.  Basil  (it t Moral ’ Reg.  lxxx.  cap . 21)  says,  “It  is  the  duty  of  a 
Christian  to  watch  every  day  and  hour,  and  to  be  thus  ready  for  that 
perfection  by  which  he  can  please  God,  as  knowing  that  the  Lord 
will  come  at  an  hour  he  expects  not.” 

Antichrist  cometh . See  on  this  the  notes  on  2 Thess.  ii.  7. 

Even  now  are  there  many  antichrists . Those  who  are  against 
Christ  and  true  forerunners  of  Antichrist,  because  they  impugn, 
equally  with  the  faith,  the  Church,  the  sacraments  of  Christ,  nay 
His  very  nature  and  person.  As  Ebion,  Cerinthus,  &c.,  and  their 
followers,  of  whom  S.  Paul  says  “ the  mystery  of  iniquity  is  already 
working ” (2  Thess.  ii.  7).  See  note  on  passage.  Rabanus  (apud  S. 
Augustine)  [vol.  vi.  append .]  says,  “Antichrist  has  many  ministers  of 
his  malignity.  For  every  one,  layman  or  canon  or  monk,  who  lives 
not  righteously,  and  violates  the  authority  of  his  order,  and  speaks 
against  that  which  is  good,  is  an  antichrist,  a minister  of  Satan.” 
Heretics  are  antichrists,  as  S.  Hilary  called  Constantius.  See  note 
on  1 Pet  iii.  14. 

They  went  out  from  us>  for  they  were  not  of  us  (either  real  or  pre- 
tended) Catholics ; and  a heretic  is  one  who  apostatises  from  the 
faith  of  Christ  which  he  once  embraced,  and  lapses  into  heresy.  See 
S.  Cyprian,  Epist.  i.  8,  and  de  Unit.  Eccl. : “ Bitterness  cannot  co  exist 
with  sweetness,  darkness  with  light,  rain  with  clear  weather,  strife 
with  peace,  barrenness  with  fertility,  drought  with  gushing  water, 
storm  with  calm.  Let  no  one  imagine  that  good  men  can  forsake  the 
Church;  the  wind  does  not  sweep  away  the  wheat,  nor  does  the 
storm  throw  down  a tree  which  is  firmly  rooted — the  chaff  is  blown 
away  with  the  storm,  and  trees  weakly  rooted  are  cast  down  by  the 
violence  of  a whirlwind,”  &c.  And  S.  Jerome  says  [Lib.  L in  Jerem.\ 
“ They  go  out  in  order  that  they  may  openly  worship  that  which  they 
used  to  venerate  in  secret”  And  S.  Augustine  (in  loc.)9  “Ye  will 
understand,  from  the  Apostle’s  own  exposition,  that  none  can  go 
away  but  antichrists,  but  that  they  who  are  not  contrary  to  Christ 
can  in  no  wise  go  out.  For  he  who  is  not  contrary  to  Christ  abideth 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


MANY  ANTICHRISTS. 


387 


in  His  Body,  and  is  counted  a member  of  it”  “ They  are  (he  adds 
afterwards)  as  evil  humours,  and  just  as  the  body  is  relieved  when 
they  are  removed,  so  is  the  Church  relieved  when  they  go  forth,  and 
when  the  body  casts  them  forth  it  says,  They  were  not  of  me,  they 
only  weighed  on  my  chest  when  they  were  within  me.” 

Whereby  we  know  that  it  is  the  last  time . For  we  see  the  heretics 
who  are  his  forerunners,  just  as  when  we  see  a king’s  outrider,  we 
know  that  he  is  near,  or  that  the  dawn  shows  that  the  sun  is  about  to 
rise.  “Many  antichrists,”  as  CEcumenius  says,  “go  before  the  one 
Antichrist,  and  prepare  for  him  the  way.” 

They  were  not  of  us , for  had  they  been  of  us,  no  doubt  they  would 
have  continued  with  us.  They  were  not  genuine  Christians.  They  had 
not  Christian  virtue  and  constancy  boldly  to  resist  all  temptations, 
so  that  when  persecution  came  on  them,  they  gave  up  the  faith  and 
became  apostates,  as  grass  is  dried  up  by  the  heat  of  the  sun.  As 
was  said  of  Joseph  and  Azarias  (1  Macc.  v.  62),  that  “they  were 
not  of  the  seed  of  those  by  whom  deliverance  was  wrought  in 
Israel.”  As  the  Romans  said  of  traitors  that  they  were  not  Romans, 
or  as  Saul  reviled  Jonathan  (1  Sam.  xx.  30).  As  S.  Augustine  says 
here,  “ Temptation  proves  that  they  are  not  of  us,  for  when  it  comes 
they  fly  away  as  not  being  sound  grain.”  As  he  says  of  Judas 
(Tract.  1.  on  John),  “ He  did  not  at  that  particular  time  become 
wicked  when  he  betrayed  the  Lord.  He  was  a thief  even  when  he 
followed  the  Lord,  for  he  followed  Him  with  the  body  only,  and  not 
in  heart.”  And  again  (in.  loc.),  “ Every  one  is  of  his  own  will  either 
an  antichrist,  or  in  Christ ; either  one  of  His  members,  or  among 
the  evil  humours.  He  that  changeth  himself  for  the  better  is  a 
member  of  the  Body,  but  he  that  abideth  in  his  wickedness  is  an 
evil  humour,  and  when  he  is  gone  out,  they  who  were  oppressed 
will  be  relieved.” 

2.  Many  explain  these  words,  ‘they  were  not  of  us/  as 
referring  to  the  free  knowledge  and  predestination  of  God.  They 
were  not  thus  predestinated  and  elected,  because  it  was  foreseen 
that  they  would  fall,  for  everything  future  is  foreseen  by  God.  This 
does  not  refer  to  election  to  eternal  blessedness.  S.  John  did  not 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


388  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  II. 

wish  to  touch  on  this  mystery,  especially  because  so  many  who 
have  fallen  from  the  faith  have  in  the  end  returned  to  it.  And  on 
the  other  hand  there  are  many  reprobates  who  are  still  in  the 
Church  who  are  not  predestined  to  glory.  But  S.  Augustine  ( de 
bono  persever.  cap . viii.)  understands  it  of  those  who  are  pre- 
destined to  glory,  and  of  those  who  (it  is  foreseen)  will  perish. 
Now  almost  all  heresiarchs  (excepting  only  Berengarius),  when  they 
have  once  left  the  Church,  never  return  to  it  again,  and  are  con- 
sequently foreknown  to  be  reprobates.  But  we  must  avoid  the 
error  of  those  who  infer  from  this  that  the  reprobation  of  God  is  the 
cause  of  their  leaving  the  Church,  and  subsequent  condemnation : 
a charge  which  the  Semipelagians  falsely  urged  against  S.  Augustine. 
He  defends  himself  thus,  “They  went  out  voluntarily,  they  fell 
voluntarily,  and  because  it  was  foreseen  they  would  fall,  they  were 
not  predestinated ; but  they  would  have  been  predestinated,  if  so  be 
they  were  to  return,  and  abide  in  holiness.  And  in  this  way  pre- 
destination is  to  many  a cause  of  their  remaining  stedfast,  to  none 
is  it  a cause  of  their  falling  ” (Art.  xii.  in  art.  sibi f also  impositis). 

3.  Some  explain  the  words  thus,  “They  were  not  of  us,” 
because,  before  they  openly  withdrew  from  the  Church  they  had 
secretly  withdrawn  from  it.  Heresy  is  the  very  height  of  impiety, 
and  is  reached  but  gradually.  See  S.  Cyprian,  Epist.  i.  8,  and  de 
Unit.  Ecd. ; and  S.  Cyril,  Catech.  vl 

Catherinus  and  Melchior  Canus  take  the  word  1 us 9 to  mean  4 the 
Apostles.1  But  this  is  too  narrow  a meaning.  S.  John  speaks  of 
Christians  in  general.  S.  John  here  warns  his  disciples  not  to  be 
alarmed  if  they  saw  even  bishops  become  apostate  (see  Acts  xx.  30). 
Salmeron  thinks  that  of  the  hundred  and  twenty  who  received  the 
Holy  Ghost  at  the  day  of  Pentecost  fourteen  became  heresiarchs. 
See,  too,  S.  Vincent  of  Lerius  and  Tertullian,  de  Prescript,  ch.  i. 
And  at  the  same  time  he  warns  them  to  work  out  their  own  salva- 
tion with  fear  and  trembling.  See  also  Rom.  xi.  20. 

But  that  they  might  be  made  manifest  that  they  were  not  all  of  us. 
God  allowed  this  to  show  their  inconsistency  and  want  of  faith,  and 
to  teach  the  faithful  to  avoid  them.  See  1 Cor.  xi  19. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


unction. 


$8$ 

Beza  has  no  ground  for  inferring  from  this  that  the  faithful  could 
never  fall  away.  It  means  only  that  their  falling  away  was  a sign 
that  they  were  not  firmly  rooted  in  the  faith.  S.  Augustine  says 
their  apostacy  was  a sign  that  they  were  not  of  the  number  of  the 
predestinate  and  elect 

Ver.  20. — But  ye  have  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One , and  ye  know 
all  thingSy  so  that  it  is  not  necessary  to  speak  at  greater  length  to 
these  antichrists.  By  the  word  ‘unction’  he  refers  to  Antichrist, 
and  also  to  Christ  (the  anointed  One).  See  also  what  Christ  Him- 
self says,  John  xvi.  13. 

But  what  is  this  ‘unction*  l (1.)  CEcumenius  and  S.  Jerome  on 
Hab.  iii.  and  S.  Cyril  Alex,  say  * baptism,’  when  we  are  anointed 
on  our  head.  (2.)  S.  Cyril  of  Jerus.  says,  ‘the  sacrament  of  confir- 
mation,’ when  we  are  anointed  on  our  forehead.  (3.)  Em.  Sa. 
says,  ‘ the  profession  of  Christianity ; ’ others  the  Christian  faith, 
grace,  the  gift  of  wisdom  and  understanding ; others  the  inspiration 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  But  they  all  come  to  the  same  point,  for  in 
these  various  ways  you  will  learn  all  the  duties  and  doctrines  of 
Christianity,  and  to  discern  and  avoid  heretics  as  opposed  to  Christ 
The  word  unction  stands  for  the  ointment  or  oil,  not  for  the  mere 
transient  act  of  anointing.  In  the  Greek  it  is  It  has 

reference  to  the  name  of  Christ,  and  the  sacraments  of  baptism 
and  confirmation,  which  used  to  be  given  immediately  after  baptism 
as  its  complement  and  perfection.  S.  Cyril  accordingly  under- 
stands it  to  refer  to  confirmation,  so  also  does  Turrianus,  and 
Bellarmine,  de  Confirm . lib.  ii.  capp . 5 et  8.  For  by  anointing  is 
here  to  be  understood,  not  so  much  sanctifying  grace,  as  the  gift 
of  wisdom  and  understanding.  (See  S.  Gregory,  Mor . v.  19  (at.  20), 
S.  Irenaeus  iv.  43).  For  this  gift  was  bestowed  at  first  on  baptized 
persons.  Acts  ii.  6,  x.  46,  xix.  6 ; 1 Cor.  xiv.  And  it  is  even  now 
given  in  baptism  (Isa.  xl  1),  though  not  so  abundantly.  The  word 
also  relates  to  the  royal  priesthood,  which  S.  Peter  (1  ii.  9)  ascribes 
to  all  Christians.  For  as  in  old  time  prophets,  priests,  and  kings 
were  anointed  to  their  office,  so  do  Christians  when  anointed  in 
baptism  and  confirmation  receive  grace,  to  rule  themselves  as 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


390  First  epistle  general  of  s.  John,  c.  it. 


kings ; to  foresee  future  good  and  evil,  as  prophets ; and  to  present, 
as  priests,  the  offerings  of  good  works.  So  that  this  gift  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  conferred  by  the  outward  anointing,  will  teach  Christians 
everything  which  concerns  Christian  life  and  conduct  For  these 
reasons  S.  John  rejoices  in  the  word  ‘unction/  as  representing 
Christ  and  His  ‘ love/  of  which  it  is  said  (Cant  i.  2),  “ Thy  name  is 
like  ointment  poured  forth ; ” and  S.  John  was,  in  consequence  of 
his  constant  preaching  of  Christ,  thrown  about  this  time  into  a 
caldron  of  boiling  oil,  but  escaped  unhurt  as  having  been 
strengthened  by  the  anointing  of  Christ.  See  also  Ps.  xlv.  8 ; Isa. 
lxi.  1 ; Acts  x.  38.  S.  Athanasius  (Epist.  ad  Strap.)  says  that  this 
ointment  is  the  Holy  Spirit  with  all  His  gifts  and  graces.  For  in 
justification  is  infused  not  only  grace  and  charity,  but  the  Holy 
Spirit  Himself.  See  Rom.  v.  5 ; Cone.  Trid.  Stss.  vi.  cap.  7.  And 
S.  Augustine  (in  loc .)  says,  This  spiritual  anointing  is  the  Holy 
Spirit  Himself,  and  the  outward  anointing  is  the  sacrament  thereof. 
So,  too,  in  the  “Veni  Creator,”  we  read  of  the  ‘Anointing 
Spirit.*  The  Holy  Spirit  then,  inhabiting,  enlightening,  and  direct- 
ing the  soul,  teaches  it  at  the  fitting  time  all  things  befitting  its 
salvation.  S.  Clement  ( Const  Apost '.  iii.  17)  explains  the  cere- 
monies of  baptism  and  confirmation  thus  : — “ Baptism  is  an  adminis- 
tration into  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God,  water  as  betokening 
burial,  oil  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  sign  of  the  Cross  for  the  Cross  itself, 
the  Chrism  as  the  confirmation  of  our  confession.”  See  too  2 Cor. 
vii.  2.  But  though  oil  has  various  virtues,  yet  its  special  use  is  to 
give  light,  and  to  feed  a flame.  And  accordingly  the  fathers  teach 
that  by  the  chrism  and  oil  is  specially  signified  the  gift  of  wisdom 
and  understanding  which  is  conferred  in  confirmation.  Amatarius 
(de  Eecl \ Off.  i.  27)  tells  us  why  the  chrism  is  formed  of  oil  and 
balsam,  “ because  by  oil  we  should  understand  right  conversation, 
which  rules  in  the  mind  by  mature  wisdom,  and  by  balsam  our 
teaching,  which  sends  abroad  a sweet  odour.”  And  S.  Ambrose 
(de  in  qui  initiantur,  chap . 7)  says,  “Call  to  mind  that  thou  hast 
received  the  spiritual  seal,  the  spirit  of  wisdom,  &c.  The  Father 
sealed  thee,  Christ  the  Lord  confirmed  thee,  and  gave  thee  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHRISM  OF  THE  ESSENCE  OF  CONFIRMATION.  $g t 

pledge  of  the  Spirit  in  thy  heart,  as  ye  have  learned  from  the 
Apostle’s  teaching.”  The  Ordo  Romanus  prescribes  a prayer  for 
blessing  the  chrism. 

Rabanus  Marcus  ( de  Inst  Cleric,  i.  30)  speaks  of  the  anointing 
in  baptism  and  confirmation,  by  the  Priest  and  Bishop  respectively, 
and  points  out  their  respective  differences.  Tertullian  (de  Resurr, 
cap,  8)  thus  speaks  of  the  ceremonies  at  confirmation  : “The  flesh  is 
anointed  that  the  soul  may  be  consecrated,  the  flesh  is  signed  that 
the  soul  also  may  be  strengthened,  the  flesh  is  overshadowed  by  the 
imposition  of  hands  that  the  soul  also  may  be  enlightened  by  the 
Spirit.”  Hugh  of  S.  Victor  (de  Sacrum,  Lib.  ii.  par,  7,  chapt,  6) 
says  that  the  chrism  should  remain  on  the  forehead  for  seven  days, 
to  indicate  the  sevenfold  gifts  of  the  Spirit ; and  Origen  (Horn,  vii. 
in  Ezek.)  speaks  of  this  oil  as  the  oil  of  Christ,  the  oil  of  holy 
doctrine. 

But  the  Innovators  misapply  this  passage,  and  say  that  they  are 
so  guided  by  the  inward  light  as  not  to  need  the  teaching  of  the 
Church.  But  they  greatly  err,  for  this  very  anointing  enlightens  the 
faithful  in  what  they  have  been  taught,  and  teaches  them  the 
doctrines  of  the  faith  which  were  first  taught,  and  that  the  anti- 
christs who  oppose  them  are  not  to  be  listened  to.  For  if  any 
doubt  should  arise,  the  same  anointing  of  the  Spirit  teaches  us,  that 
it  is  not  the  part  of  any  one  to  resolve  it,  but  that  the  doctors  and 
rulers  of  the  Church  should  be  consulted,  whom  God  placed  in  the 
Church  for  this  very  purpose  (Eph.  iv.  11). 

Morally , we  are  here  taught  to  implore  the  aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
in  all  our  doubts,  difficulties,  and  perplexities.  (See  2 Chron.  xx.  12.) 
S.  Cyril  (Catech,  xvi.)  strikingly  remarks  on  the  light  which  the 
Holy  Spirit  pours  into  men’s  hearts,  as  with  Isaiah  who  saw  the 
Lord  sitting  on  His  throne ; as  with  Ezekiel  and  Daniel ; or  with 
S.  Peter,  who  then  knew  the  wickedness  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira ; 
or  as  in  the  case  of  Elisha  and  GehazL 

Mystically.  There  is  a threefold  unction : of  compunction,  in  detest- 
ing sin ; of  devotion,  in  calling  to  mind  the  benefits  God  has  con- 
ferred ; and  of  piety,  in  compassion  for  our  neighbours.  S.  Bernard 


Digitized  by  Gj  oogle 


%$2  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  II. 

(i Serm . x.  and  xx.  on  Canticles , and  Serm . ii.  on  Pentecost ) dwells  at 
length  on  these  points. 

And  ye  know  all  things — of  which  I have  just  spoken,  all  ye 
ought  to  know. 

Ver.  21. — I have  not  written  unto  you  because  ye  know  not  the 
truths  but  because  ye  know  it.  S.  John  says  this,  to  gain  their  favour, 
and  to  stimulate  them  to  more  diligent  study.  I have  not  written 
to  teach  you,  but  to  strengthen  you  in  what  you  already  know. 
See  Rom.  xv.  15. 

And  that  no  lie  is  of  the  truth . By  a lie  he  means,  false  doctrine 
and  heresy.  For  all  these  doctrines  come  not  from  God,  who  is 
the  source  of  truth,  but  from  the  father  of  lies.  See  John  viii.  44. 
And  accordingly  S.  Augustine  says,  “ We  are  here  told  how  to  know 
Antichrist  For  what  is  Christ  ? The  truth,  as  He  Himself  said.  All 
they  then  who  lie  are  not  of  the  truth.”  ( Contra  Mendce.  cap.  xviii.) 

Ver.  22. — Who  is  a liar , but  he  that  denieth  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ  l He  here  explains  what  kind  of  lie  he  means,  the  heresy 
of  denying  that  Jesus  was  the  Messiah,  the  Son  of  God,  as  Simon 
Magus,  Ebion,  Cerinthus,  and  other  Judaisers,  against  whom  S.  John 
**•  wrote,  both  ancient  and  modern.  For,  as  Bede  says,  “ Compared 

with  this  all  other  lies  are  little  or  nothing.”  Indeed,  what  more 
pernicious  lie  could  be  uttered  or  invented  than  this,  cutting  off 
as  it  does  all  faith  and  hope  of  salvation  ? He  then  that  maintains 
it,  is  pre-eminently  a liar,  because  he  is  heretical,  sacrilegious,  an 
* atheist,  an  antichrist  The  word  is  commonly  used  of  those  who 

mean  one  thing  and  say  another.  And  this  is  the  case  with  these 
very  persons,  for  they  knew  or  ought  to  know  that  Jesus  was  the 
Christ  So  writes  Tertullian  (de  Prescript.  Heret.  cap.  xxxiii.) : 
“John  in  his  Epistle  specially  calls  those  persons  antichrist,  who 
said  that  Jesus  had  not  come  in  the  flesh,  as  Marcion  and  Ebion 
maintained.”  And  as  CEcumenius  tells  us,  “ Simon  stated  that  Jesus 
and  Christ  were  different  persons.  Jesus  who  was  bom  of  Mary, 
Christ  who  had  come  down  from  heaven.”  S.  Cyril  ( Catech . vi.) 
says  that  Simon  Magus  was  the  author  of  all  these  heresies,  and 
then  enlarges  on  them  and  his  impostures. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


DENYING  THE  SON. 


393 


Cornelius  here  says  much  of  the  heresies  and  follies  of  the 
Anabaptists,  for  which  he  quotes  their  history  by  Arnold  Meshovius. 

He  is  antichrist  that  denieth  the  Father  and  the  Son.  Because 
by  saying  that  Christ  is  not  the  Son  of  God,  they  say  that  God  is 
not  His  Father.  For  the  terms  Father  and  Son  are  correlative,  and 
accordingly  if  one  of  them  is  done  away  with,  so  is  the  other  also. 
CEcumenius  supposes  that  Valentinus  is  here  aimed  at,  who  said 
that  there  was  another  Father,  beside  Him  who  was  called  the 
Father  of  Christ  And  these  self-same  heretics  (he  says)  deny  the 
Son,  by  affirming  that  He  is  a mere  man,  and  not  God  by  nature. 
So  too  Basilides.  (See  Irenaeus,  L 23  ; Tertullian,  de  Prescript. ; 
Epiphanius,  Hcer.  xxiv.,  and  others.) 

Ver.  23. — "Whosoever  denieth  the  Son , hath  not  the  Father.  In 
Whom  to  abide  (as  Cajetan  says),  “nor  as  abiding  in  Him,  for  he 
believes  not  His  eternal  generation  ” (see  Dionysius ). 

He  hath  Him  not  in  his  mind,  and  consequently  does  not  confess 
Him  with  his  life.  He  seems  to  refer  to  John  v.  37,  and  as  he 
says  above,  cap.  i.,  “ His  word  is  not  in  us.”  And  in  this  chapter,  vers. 
5 and  24.  For  it  is  by  faith,  hope,  and  charity  that  God  the 
Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit  abide  in  us,  and  we  consequently  have 
them  in  us,  just  as  a Church  has  the  Eucharist  within  it,  for  a holy 
soul  is  in  truth  the  temple  of  God  who  dwells  within  it  He  here 
aims  at  the  Judaising  heretics,  who  deny  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity, 
and  say  that  there  is  but  one  Person  in  the  Godhead,  and  con- 
sequently deny  that  Christ  is  God,  and  the  Son  of  God.  Christ  in 
this  very  Gospel  maintains  against  them  that  He  is  the  Only 
Begotten  Son  of  God  the  Father.  See  iii.  35,  v.  18  seq.  36  seq., 
vi.  58.  For,  as  CEcumenius  says,  “ Had  they  known  the  Father,  they 
would  without  any  doubt  have  known  Him  to  be  the  Father  of  the 
Only  Begotten  Son.”  And  more  especially  because  he  who  knows 
not  the  Trinity  knows  not  the  nature  of  the  Godhead  to  be  so  full 
and  prolific  as  to  require  a plurality  of  Persons,  and  demands  that 
it  should  be  communicated  to  all  the  Three,  so  that  in  taking  away 
One  Person  you  in  fact  do  away  with  the  Godhead  altogether. 
And  this  is  what  S.  John  means  here.  In  like  manner,  Christ  said  to 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


394  first  epistle  general  of  s.  John,  c.  it. 

Philip,  “ He  that  hath  seen  Me,  hath  seen  the  Father.  . . . Believest 
thou  not  that  I am  in  the  Father  and  the  Father  in  Me?”  (John  xiv. 
9,  io).  Whereby  is  signified  plurality  of  Persons  and  identity  of 
Essence,  and  the  intimate  and  complete  indwelling  of  one  Person  in 
another.  Damascene  (de  Fide , i.  2)  terms  this  npxupi <rti,  and 
the  Schoolmen  (after  him)  circumincessio . See  S.  Augustine,  de 
Trinit  vi. ; S.  Hilary,  de  Trinit.  Lib . iv. ; and  Ambroseaster,  in  2 
Cor.  13.  S.  Augustine  says,  “ Each  is  in  each,  and  all  in  each,  and 
each  in  all,  and  all  in  all,  and  all  are  One.” 

S.  Cyprian  (Exhort.  Martyr , cap . 5)  and  S.  Hilary  (de  Trin.  lib.  vi.) 
here  read,  He  that  hath  the  Son , hath  both  the  Father  and  the  Son,  i.e.t 
wishing  him  well,  and  favouring  him.  S.  Augustine  has  the  same 
reading,  but  explains  it  of  worship  and  veneration:  “He  who 
worships  the  Son  worships  the  Father,  for  he  cannot  worship  the 
Father  who  worships  not  the  Son,  as  it  is  said  John  y.  23.” 

Ver.  24. — Let  that  which  ye  have  heard  from  the  beginning  abide 
in  you.  Be  stedfast  in  the  faith,  doctrine,  and  Christian  life,  which 
ye  received  at  first,  for  thus  will  true  faith  abide  in  you,  and  ye  will 
abide  in  the  true  faith  and  sonship  of  God.  See  Gal.  i.  9 ; Heb. 
xiii.  9.  As  S.  Cyprian  strikingly  says  (Ep.  xl.) : “ I exhort  and 

advise  you  not  to  believe  rashly  pernicious  words,  or  readily  yield 
consent  to  words  of  falsehood,  not  to  put  darkness  for  light,  night 
for  day,  hunger  for  food,  poison  for  a remedy,  death  for  life.” 

If  that  abide  with  you,  which  ye  have  heard  from  the  beginning  (as 
I have  just  explained  it),  ye  also  shall  abide  in  the  Son,  and  in  the 
Father.  We  must  consider  that  the  Holy  Spirit  is  also  included  in 
the  expression,  the  Father  and  the  Son.  For  the  Father  and  the 
Son  are  the  Breathers  forth  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  in  their  Essence, 
as  understood  in  its  full  meaning,  they  include  the  power  of  breath- 
ing forth  the  Holy  Spirit,  yea,  its  actual  exercise.  But  at  this  time 
no  question  had  arisen  respecting  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  merely 
respecting  the  Son,  and  consequently  respecting  the  Father.  The 
Son  is  here  put  before  the  Father,  for  the  special  reason  that  “ no 
man  cometh  to  the  Father  but  through  the  Son.”  John  xiv.  “For 
no  one  will  behold  the  greatness  of  the  Divine  Glory,  except  he  be 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


A&IDtNG  IN  TttE  SON.  395 

born  again  by  the  sacraments  of  that  Manhood,  which  the  Son 
assumed.”  So  Bede. 

But  further,  if  ye  abide  in  the  Son  and  in  the  Father,  the  Father 
and  the  Son  will  in  their  turn  abide  in  you.  As  (Ecumenius  says, 
“ Ye  will  have  union  and  communion  with  Him,  as  Christ  promised  ** 
(John  xiv.  23).  As  S.  Augustine  remarks  on  this  passage,  “The 
Holy  Spirit  also  dwells  in  the  Saints  together  with  the  Father  and 
the  Son  : just  as  God  in  His  temple.  The  Father,  the  Son,  and  the 
Holy  Spirit  come  to  us  when  we  come  to  them — they  come  to  us  by 
their  aid,  we  by  our  obedience — they  come  by  their  enlightening,  we 
by  gazing  on  them — they  come  by  filling  us,  we  by  admitting 
them  within — so  that  we  behold  them  by  no  outward,  but  by 
inward  vision,  and  they  abide  in  us,  not  transitorily,  but  for 
ever.” 

Ver.  25. — And  this  is  the  promise  which  He  has  promised  tts,  even 
eternal  life \ Gagneius  refers  thus  to  the  promise  made  by  our  Lord, 
John  xvii.  20.  “ For  (he  says)  the  promise  He  has  made  us  is  indeed 
eternal  life,  since  it  is  eternal  life  to  abide  in  God,  and  to  enjoy  Him 
here  in  grace,  and  hereafter  in  glory.”  CEcumenius  makes  the  word 
‘and*  equivalent  to  ‘because:*  “Ye  will  abide  in  the  Father  and 
the  Son  because  He  promised  you  this  in  promising  eternal  life.” 
But  the  first  meaning  is  the  best.  This  is  a powerful  motive  for 
constancy  in  the  faith.  “ Let  the  memory  of  the  promised  reward,” 
says  Bede,  “ make  thee  persevere  in  thy  work.**  “ Let  us  see  (says  S. 
Augustine)  what  He  hath  promised?  Silver,  or  possessions,  or 
pleasant  lands  ? No  indeed,  this  is  not  the  reward  for  which  He 
exhorts  us  to  endure.  It  is  eternal  life.**  And  he  adds,  “God 
combines  threats  with  His  promises,  even  eternal  death,  if  we  dis- 
obey Him.”  “ A powerful  man  threatens  us  with  imprisonment,  with 
fire,  with  torments,  with  wild  beasts.  But  does  he  threaten  us  with 
eternal  fire  ? Dread  that  which  the  Almighty  threatens,  love  that 
which  He  promised,  and  then  the  whole  world  is  a worthless  thing, 
whether  in  its  promises  or  its  threats.” 

Ver.  27 — And  let  that  anointing  which  ye  have  received  abide  in 
you.  By  the  anointing  he  means  the  gift  of  wisdom  and  under- 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


396  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  It. 


standing  given  in  baptism  and  augmented  in  confirmation.  See 
above,  ver.  20. 

And  ye  need  not  that  any  man  teach  you,  but  as  his  anointing  teacheth 
you  of  all  things , understand  1 abide  in  it]  as  S.  John  adds  shortly 
afterwards.  Some  MSS.  add  i so  do  ye.*  It  means,  ye  need  not  go 
to  false  apostles  and  heretics  to  teach  you  the  truth,  for  ye  have 
already  learned  it  from  the  Apostles  themselves,  and  that  which  they 
taught  outwardly,  the  Holy  Spirit  must  needs  teach  you  within. 
(See  Is.  liv.  13;  John  vi.  45  ; Ps.  xciv.  10.)  Be  stedfast  then  in 
that  which  ye  have  thus  been  taught.  See  Bellarmine,  de  Verbo  Dei, , 
iii.  3,  who  says,  “ Ye  have  no  need  for  a Lutheran  or  Calvinist  to 
teach  you  Christian  doctrine,  because  ye  have  been  fully  taught  it  by 
the  teaching  of  the  Church,  and  the  aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit  See 

I Pet  v.  12  ; Col.  i.  6.  And  S.  Augustine  (in  loc.)  thus  writes: 
“ I for  my  part  have  spoken  to  alL  But  they  to  whom  that  unction 
speaketh  not  within,  they  whom  the  Holy  Spirit  teacheth  not,  go 
away  untaught.  The  outward  teachings  of  a master  are  a kind  of 
aid  and  warning,  but  He  who  teacheth  the  heart  hath  His  seat  in 
heaven.  . . . One  is  your  master,  even  Christ.  Let  Him  speak  to  you 
within,  when  no  one  is  present.  For  though  some  one  is  at  thy  side, 
yet  there  is  no  one  in  thy  heart.  Let  there  be  no  one  in  thy  heart, 
let  Christ  be  in  thy  heart,  let  His  unction  be  in  thy  heart,  lest  thy 
heart  be  athirst  in  the  desert,  and  have  no  fountains  to  water  it. 
The  Master  who  teacheth  is  within,  Christ  teacheth,  His  inspiration 
teacheth.  But  where  His  inspiration  and  His  unction  are  not, 
words  echo  in  vain  from  without.”  And  so  too  S.  Gregory,  expound- 
ing these  very  words,  says,  “ Unless  the  same  spirit  be  in  the  heart 
of  the  hearer  the  words  of  the  teacher  are  useless  5 ” and  he  adds, 

II  Do  not  ascribe  to  the  teacher  that  which  ye  hear  from  his  lips,  for 
unless  He  who  really  teaches  you  be  within,  the  tongue  of  the 
teacher  labours  outwardly  in  vain.”  But  when  he  says,  “ His  unction 
will  teach  you  of  all  things,”  &c.,  he  means,  of  all  that  ye  have  heard, 
all  that  the  faithful  are  bound  to  know,  as  having  been  so  taught  by 
their  earliest  instruction  and  catechising  (so  even  Beza  argues),  lest 
any  one  should  infer  from  this  passage  that  private  judgment  should 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  COMING  OF  CHRIST.  397 

be  the  interpreter  of  scripture,  and  the  judge  of  controversies.”  See 
Ezek.  xiii.  3. 

This  anointing , some  refer  to  Christ,  the  Anointed  One,  the 
abstract  for  the  concrete. 

And  is  truth  and  is  no  lie . This  is  a double  assertion,  confirming 
the  first  statement  by  a denial  of  its  contrary  (see  John  L 20). 

And  as  it  hath  taught  you,  ‘ And  * here  stands  for  i therefore.* 

And  now , little  children , abide  in  it  In  the  orthodox  faith  which 
ye  have  been  taught,  amid  all  the  fair  words  of  heretics,  and  per- 
severe therein. 

That  when  Christ  shall  appear  ye  may  have  confidence . That  is, 
boldness  of  speech.  See  Wisdom  v.  1 ; Col.  iii.  4.  S.  Basil  says 
(Horn,  xl  Hex,  1),  “ Abraham  also  will  fear  in  the  judgment,  and 
be  in  agony.”  This  is  an  exaggeration.  But  it  signifies  the  severity 
of  the  judgment  in  itself  (1  Pet  iv.  18).  But  if  we  look  at  the  grace 
and  mercy  of  God,  on  the  other  hand,  it  will  assure  all  saints  of  their 
salvation,  and  will  place  them  as  His  friends  and  His  elect  on  His 
right  hand,  and  separate  them  from  the  reprobate,  before  the  judg- 
ment begins. 

And  not  be  ashamed  before  Him  at  His  coming.  Let  us  not  shame 
one  another  by  your  falling  from  the  faith — shame,  i.e,  yourselves, 
and  us  your  apostles  and  teachers  for  not  keeping  you  therein.  For 
the  goodness  of  the  scholar  is  the  praise  and  glory  of  the  teacher. 
S.  Basil  (on  the  words  of  Ps.  xxxiv.),  “ I will  teach  you  the  fear  of  the 
Lord,”  says  that  the  shame  and  confusion  of  the  lost  will  be  their 
bitterest  punishment  See  Rev.  vii.  17.  And  the  ground  of  their 
shame  will  be  this,  that  Christ  will  proclaim,  before  the  whole  world, 
all  their  shameful  and  horrible  sins,  however  secret,  and  committed 
in  thought  only ; that  they  will  see  the  saints,  whom  they  despised  in 
this  world,  raised  up  above  them  to  glory,  to  judge  and  to  condemn 
them,  because  they  foolishly  neglected  to  expiate  their  sins  by 
penitence  and  the  shame  of  confession.  See  Isa.  lxvi.  24 ; Dan.  xiL  2. 
S.  Cyril  (Catech,  iii.)  says  that  the  faithful  are  at  their  confirmation 
anointed  on  their  foreheads,  as  being  the  seat  of  shame,  in  order 
that  they  might  not  be  ashamed  to  confess  the  name  of  Christ,  and 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


398  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  II. 

that  they  might  not  commit  any  shameful  act,  and  thus  be  confounded 
at  the  day  of  judgment.  S.  Augustine  (in  loci)  strikingly  observes, 

“ Faithful  is  He  that  promiseth.  He  deceiveth  not.  Only  do  thou 
faint  not,  but  wait  for  the  promise.  The  truth  cannot  deceive.  Be 
not  thou  false,  professing  one  thing  and  doing  another.  Keep  thou 
the  faith,  and  He  will  keep  His  promise.  But  if  thou  keep  not  the 
faith,  thou  hast  defrauded  thyself,  He  has  not  broken  faith  with  thee.” 
And  CEcumenius  : “ What  can  be  more  glorious  or  more  admirable 
than  to  act  boldly  in  His  sight,  to  whom  we  shall  give  an  account 
of  our  labours,  and  not  be  ashamed  before  Him  at  His  coming?” 

At  His  coming , in  glory  to  judge  the  world.  “ We  now  see  through 
a glass  darkly,  but  then  we  shall  see  face  to  face  ” (i  Cor.  xiii.  12). 

Ver.  29. — /f(ie.  since)  ye  know  that  He  is  righteous , know  ye  that 
every  one  that  doeth  righteousness  is  born  of  Him . He  shows  the  way 
and  means  by  which  we  can  have  confidence  before  Christ  as  our 
Judge  : that  is,  by  performing  righteous  and  holy  deeds,  to  offer  to 
Him  as  our  just  Judge.  Let  not  any  one  suppose  that  orthodox 
belief  alone  suffices,  works  of  righteousness  are  also  required.  For 
Christ,  not  only  as  God,  but  as  the  holiest  of  men,  loves  those  who 
are  righteous ; and  will  pass  on  them  a righteous  sentence  of  acquittal. 
It  is  the  part  of  a just  judge  to  judge  of  every  one's  works,  and  to 
assign  their  rewards  and  punishments  accordingly.  He  then  that 
doeth  righteousness,  will  in  the  day  of  judgment  not  be  confounded 
before  Him,  but  will  have  every  confidence.  Because  he  is  like  his 
judge,  nay  more,  His  son  and  heir,  and  thus  he  will  be  sure  of  his 
inheritance  (Rom.  viii.  17).  For  all  our  righteousness  flows  from 
the  righteousness,  holiness,  and  grace  of  Christ  Righteousness  is 
here  to  be  understood  in  a general  sense,  as  including  all  the  virtues 
through  which  we  are  called  righteous  before  God  (see  John  i.  12). 
Moreover,  there  is  no  surer  argument  that  we  are  born  of  God  than 
showing  Him  forth  in  our  deeds  and  life.  Didymus  observes  that 
the  Apostle  uses  the  present  tense  (doeth),  not  the  past  or  future. 
Because  a good  root  brings  forth  good  fruit.  As  bom  again  of  God 
by  righteousness  and  grace,  and  being  made  partakers  of  the  Divine 
Nature  (2  Pet.  i.  4),  (for  we  really  partake  of  the  Substance  of  God 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


DIVINE  GENERATION. 


399 


by  supernatural  grace),  we  ought  ever  to  manifest  this  our  birth  and 
our  divine  life  by  loving  works  of  righteousness.  For  as  a man  is 
not  alive  who  does  not  perform  the  functions  of  a living  man,  so  in 
like  manner  he  is  not  righteous,  not  regenerate  or  living  to  God,  who 
does  not  perform  righteous  acts,  especially  since  it  is  the  part  of  a 
child  to  imitate  his  father.  And  since  the  righteous  God  ever  does 
righteousness,  we,  as  His  children,  should  ever  do  the  same. 

2.  Salmeron  observes  that  this  divine  generation  resembles,  in  a 
measure,  our  natural  birth.  For  Christ,  as  man,  brought  us  forth 
with  the  greatest  suffering,  and  as  God  He  works  in  us  that  grace 
and  righteousness  whereby  we  are  born  again  as  children  of  God. 

3.  CEcumenius  remarks  that  as  like  begets  like  so  are  the  righteous 
born  of  God.  And  Didymus  says,  “ that  virtue  manifests  our  right- 
eousness in  act.  No  one  therefore  is  righteous,  before  he  does 
righteous  acts,  nor  yet  after  he  ceases  to  do  them.” 

Lastly,  S.  Augustine  says,  that  righteousness  is  perfect  in  the 
angels,  but  only  beginning  in  men.  “ In  the  holy  angels,  who  turn 
aside  by  no  lapse,  who  fall  not  away  through  pride,  but  remain  ever 
in  the  contemplation  of  the  Word,  and  count  nothing  else  sweet, 
save  Him  who  created  them — in  them  is  perfect  righteousness, 
whereas  in  us  it  has  only  begun  to  be  through  the  Spirit.”  And 
again,  “ The  beginning  of  our  righteousness  is  the  confession  of  our 
sins.  Thou  hast  begun  not  to  defend  thy  sin  : thou  hast  begun 
thy  righteousness.  But  it  will  be  perfected  in  thee,  when  nothing 
else  shall  delight  thee  to  do ; when  death  will  be  swallowed  up  in 
victory,  when  no  lust  shall  excite  thee,  when  there  will  be  no  strug- 
gling with  flesh  and  blood,  when  there  shall  be  the  crown  of  victory, 
the  triumph  over  the  enemy ; then  there  will  be  perfect  righteous- 
ness. But  now  we  are  still  fighting,  we  are  still  in  the  lists,  we 
smite  and  are  smitten.  We  have  still  to  wait,  to  see  who  is  con- 
queror. But  he  is  the  conqueror,  who  in  striking  a blow  relies 
not  on  his  own  strength,  but  on  God,  who  cheers  and  encourages 
him  on.” 

The  righteous  therefore  emulate  the  righteousness  of  the  angels, 
so  that  keeping  their  minds  from  all  earthly  defilements,  and  tearing 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


400  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  II. 

away  their  love  from  created  objects,  they  may  fix  it  on  their  Creator 
alone,  and  love  Him,  worship  Him,  and  give  Him  thanks  both  in 
prosperity  and  adversity,  making  their  words  and  life  together  with 
His  Cross  and  Passion  a continuous  and  constant  praise  to  God. 
Such  is  the  life  of  angels.  See  Job  xxxvii.  7. 

Christians,  moreover,  as  new  bom  in  Christ,  should  emulate 
Christ,  should  “ speak  as  oracles,  should  live  as  gods,”  * for  Christ 
thus  spake  and  thus  lived.  And  in  this  way  will  they  smite  even 
the  hearts  of  sinners,  convert  and  beget  them  for  Christ,  as  was  said 
of  S.  Basil  (S.  Gregory  Nazianzen,  Orat  funeb)r  “His  word  was  as 
thunder,  for  his  life  was  as  lightning  ! n 

# This  seems  a quotation. 


Hzed  by  CjOO^Ic 


( 401  ) 


CHAPTER  III. 

He  declareth  the  singular  love  of  God  towards  us,  in  making  us  his  sons : 3 who 
therefore  ought  obediently  to  keep  his  commandments , II  as  also  brotherly  to 
love  one  another . 

BEHOLD  what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us,  that  we 
should  be  called  the  sons  of  God  : therefore  the  world  knoweth  us  not, 
because  it  knew  him  not. 

2  Beloved,  now  are  we  the  sons  of  God,  and  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we 
shall  be  : but  we  know  that,  when  he  shall  appear,  we  shall  be  like  him ; for  we 
shall  see  him  as  he  is. 

3  And  every  man  that  hath  this  hope  in  him  purifieth  himself,  even  as  he  is 
pure. 

4  Whosoever  committeth  sin  transgresseth  also  the  law  : for  sin  is  the  trans- 
gression of  the  law. 

5  And  ye  know  that  he  was  manifested  to  take  away  our  sins ; and  in  him  is 
no  sin. 

6  Whosoever  abideth  in  him  sinneth  not ; whosoever  sinneth  hath  not  seen 
him,  neither  known  him. 

7  Little  children,  let  no  man  deceive  you : he  that  doeth  righteousness  is 
righteous,  even  as  he  is  righteous. 

8  He  that  committeth  sin  is  of  the  devil;  for  the  devil  sinneth  from  the 
beginning.  For  this  purpose  the  Son  of  God  was  manifested,  that  he  might 
destroy  the  works  of  the  devil. 

9  Whosoever  is  bom  of  God  doth  not  commit  sin  5 for  his  seed  remaineth  in 
him  : and  he  cannot  sin,  because  he  is  born  of  God. 

10  In  this  the  children  of  God  are  manifest,  and  the  children  of  the  devil : 
whosoever  doeth  not  righteousness  is  not  of  God,  neither  he  that  loveth  not  his 
brother. 

11  For  this  is  the  message  that  ye  heard  from  the  beginning,  that  we  should 
love  one  another. 

12  Not  as  Cain,  who  was  of  that  wicked  one,  and  slew  his  brother.  And 
wherefore  slew  he  him?  Because  his  own  works  were  evil,  and  his  brother’s 
righteous. 

13  Marvel  not,  my  brethren,  if  the  world  hate  you. 

14  We  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto  life,  because  we  love  the 
brethren.  He  that  loveth  not  his  brother  abideth  in  death. 

15  Whosoever  hateth  his  brother  is  a murderer : and  ye  know  that  no  mur- 
derer hath  eternal  life  abiding  in  him, 

VOL.  V.  a C 


by  C 


402  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  III. 


1 6 Hereby  perceive  we  the  love  of  God \ because  he  laid  down  his  life  for  us  : 
and  we  ought  to  lay  down  our  lives  for  the  brethren. 

17  But  whoso  hath  this  world’s  good,  and  seeth  his  brother  have  need,  and 
shutteth  up  his  bowels  of  compassion  from  him,  how  dwelleth  the  love  of  God 
in  him  ? 

18  My  little  children,  let  us  not  love  in  word,  neither  in  tongue  5 but  in  deed 
and  in  truth. 

19  And  hereby  we  know  that  we  are  of  the  truth,  and  shall  assure  our  hearts 
before  him. 

20  For  if  our  heart  condemn  us,  God  is  greater  than  our  heart,  and  knoweth 
all  things. 

21  Beloved,  if  our  heart  condemn  us  not,  then  have  we  confidence  toward  God. 

22  And  whatsoever  we  ask,  we  receive  of  him,  because  we  keep  his  command- 
ments, and  do  those  things  that  are  pleasing  in  his  sight. 

23  And  this  is  his  commandment,  That  we  should  believe  on  the  name  of  his 
Son  Jesus  Christ,  and  love  one  another,  as  he  gave  us  commandment. 

24  And  he  that  keepeth  his  commandments  dwelleth  in  him,  and  he  in  him. 
And  hereby  we  know  that  he  abideth  in  us,  by  the  Spirit  which  he  hath  given  us. 

Ver.  1. — Behold  what  great  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  on  us 
(unworthy,  enemies  and  sinners  as  we  are),  that  we  should  be  called , 
and  be  the  sons  of  God.  Love,  actively,  His  wondrous  love  to  us, 
and  passively,  as  communicated  and  infused  into  us.  “ How  much 
He  loved  us,”  says  Vatablus,  “ in  giving  us  that  love  whereby  we 
are  called  the  sons  of  God.  For  our  created  love  flows  out  of  His 
uncreated  love,  as  a ray  from  the  sun,”  &c.  For  those  whom  God 
loves  with  His  uncreated  love,  He  makes  to  love  Him  in  return 
with  that  created  love  which  He  infuses.  For  love  is  friendship  or 
mutual  affection  between  God  and  a righteous  man.  And  just  as 
we  His  creatures  owe  Him,  as  our  Creator,  all  honour,  worship,  and 
service,  so  do  we  as  His  servants  owe  Him,  as  our  Lord,  fear, 
reverence,  and  obedience,  and  as  the  Father  of  all  do  we  owe  Him 
our  highest  love,  our  whole  heart,  our  whole  will  and  affections. 

S.  John  had  before  stated  that  he  that  doeth  righteousness  is  born 
of  God.  He  here  teaches  the  excellence  of  that  Divine  sonship, 
its  fruit  and  its  reward,  in  order  to  excite  the  faithful  to  those  works 
of  righteousness,  which  show  that  they  are  His  thankful  and  worthy 
children,  and  to  lead  them  to  preserve  this  their  sonship,  till  it 
attain  the  reward  of  eternal  life.  Each  of  S.  John’s  words  has 
great  weight,  and  inspires  fresh  inducements  to  love.  By  the 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  FIRST  STEP  OF  LOVE. 


403 


Father  we  understand  the  whole  Trinity,  but  especially  the  Person 
of  the  Father,  because  it  is  the  Father’s  work  to  beget  children  like 
to  His  Only  Begotten  Son,  and  because  our  calling,  our  election, 
our  predestination  are  the  proper  work  of  the  Father,  and  the 
effect  of  all  these  is  our  justification  and  adoption  as  sons.  As 
S.  Augustine  says  (de  Nat.  grot . cap . ult),  “ Inchoate  love  is  inchoate 
righteousness,  advanced  love  is  advanced  righteousness,  perfect 
love  is  perfect  righteousness.”  And  S.  Dion  (Eect  flier.  1.  2)  says, 
“The  first  motion  of  the  mind  to  heavenly  things,  and  its  aiming 
after  God,  is  love.  And  the  first  step  of  holy  love  towards  ful- 
filling the  commands  of  God,  is  an  unspeakable  operation,  because 
we  have  it  from  above.  For  if  this  heavenly  state  has  a divine 
origin  and  birth,  he  who  hath  not  received  it  will  neither  know 
nor  do  those  things  which  are  taught  by  God.”  And  hence  S. 
Cyril  (Is.  xliv.  and  Tesaur.  xii.  3)  calls  love  the  stamp  of  the 
Divine  Essence,  the  sanctification,  refashioning,  the  beauty  and 
splendour  of  the  soul. 

That  we  should  be  called  the  sons  of  God  (by  adoption,  as  Christ 
is  by  nature)  and  be  such.  Many  are  named  that  which  they  are 
not  But  we  are  so  named,  in  order  that  we  may  be  such.  For 
as  S.  Augustine  says  (in  loc.)f  “If  any  are  called  sons  and  are 
not,  what  doth  the  name  profit,  where  the  thing  is  not?  How 
many  are  called  physicians,  who  know  not  how  to  heal,  or  watchers, 
who  sleep  all  the  night  through  ? And  in  like  manner  many  are 
called  Christians,  and  are  not  found  to  be  really  such,  because 
they  are  not  that  which  they  are  called,  in  life,  in  faith,  in  hope, 
in  charity.”  But  what  are  the  words  here  ? “ That  ye  should  be 
called  and  should  be  the  sons  of  God.”  As  S.  Paul  says,  Gal. 
iv.  6.  Let  the  innovators  note  this  who  say  that  we  are  called 
righteous  only  by  Christ’s  imputed  righteousness,  that  the  words 
* and  be  such  * are  wanting  in  many  MSS.  But  then  the  meaning 
is  included  in  the  words  * are  called.’  For  those  who  are  called 
anything  by  God  are  made  to  be  that  which  they  are  called.  As 
a king  by  calling  any  one  by  a title,  confers  that  title  upon  him, 
much  more  does  God  do  so,  by  infusing  real  gifts  of  grace  in  those 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


404-  FIRST  epistle  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  III. 

whom  He  calls  His  sons,  thus  making  them  worthy  of  the  name, 
which  a king  cannot  do.  For  as  God  in  begetting  His  Soil  com- 
municated to  Him  His  very  nature  and  divinity,  so  does  He  by 
regenerating  us  make  us  partakers  of  His  Godhead,  as  S.  Peter 
says  and  the  Psalmist  also  (Ps.  ixxxii.  6).  As  God  is  holy  in  His 
essence,  so  does  the  righteous  man  who  is  born  of  God  partake  of 
His  sanctity,  and  all  His  other  attributes,  being  Almighty,  unchange- 
able, heavenly,  impeccable,  full  of  goodness.  He  is  omniscient, 
as  being  taught  of  God ; imperturbable,  as  living  above  the  world; 
liberal,  and  envying  no  man,  but  promoting  every  one’s  interest,  as 
though  it  were  his  own.  He  glows  with  charity,  rendering  his 
enemies  good  for  evil,  and  thus  making  them  his  friends.  He  is 
upright,  patient,  constant,  even-minded,  prudent,  bold,  sincere. 
See  James  i.  18  ; Hos.  i.  io. 

Hence  it  follows  that  we  are  by  justification  the  sons  of  God  in 
a threefold  respect — (i.)  In  the  past  by  our  spiritual  generation. 
See  2 Pet.  i.  4;  John  i.  12;  and  above,  iv.  4 and  6,  and  v.  18. 
(2.)  By  His  fatherly  care  over  us.  (See  Ps.  lv.  23  ; above  v.  15  ; 
Luke  xii.  7.)  “ Why  fearest  thou,”  says  S.  Augustine,  “ since  thou  art 

in  the  bosom  of  God,  who  is  both  thy  father  and  thy  mother?” 
(3.)  He  is  our  Father,  by  the  heavenly  inheritance  which  He  will 
give  us,  making  us  heirs  of  God  and  joint  heirs  with  Christ  See 
Ps.  xvi.  6.  The  Gentiles  used  falsely  to  boast  of  their  descent 
from  the  gods.  But  the  Christian’s  boast  is  a true  one.  And  the 
truer  it  is,  the  more  should  it  stimulate  us  to  godlike  deeds.  As 
S.  Cyprian  says  (de  Spectaculis) : “ No  one  will  admire  the  works 
of  men,  who  knows  that  he  is  the  son  of  God.  He  who  can 
admire  anything  after  God,  casts  himself  down  from  his  high  estate. 
When  the  flesh  solicits  thee,  say,  ‘I  am  a son  of  God,  I am  born 
to  greater  things  than  to  be  the  slave  of  appetite ; ’ when  the  world 
tempts,  reply,  ‘I  am  a son  of  God,  and  destined  for  heavenly 
treasures,  and  it  is  beneath  me  to  seek  for  a morsel  of  white  or  red 
earth.’  And  when  Satan  offers  me  honour  and  pomps,  I say,  4 Get 
thee  behind  me,  for  as  being  a son  and  heir  of  God,  and  born  for 
a heavenly  kingdom,  I trample  all  worldly  honours  under  my  feet.’ 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  BEATIFIC  GLORY. 


40S 


Devote  then  the  rest  of  thy  life  (it  may  be  short  indeed)  to  such 
noble,  arduous,  and  divine  works  as  Christ  and  the  Saints  have 
performed.  Art  thou  called  to  a state  of  perfection,  to  devote  thy 
life  to  the  salvation  of  souls  ? — art  thou  called  to  heathen  lands,  to 
the  cross  and  martyrdom  ? — surrender  thyself  to  the  call,  as  becomes 
the  son  of  so  great  a father.”  Alvarez  (as  De  Ponte  relates  in  his 
life)  used  to  apply  this  stimulus  to  himself : “ Do  not  fall  away 
from  the  lofty  purposes  of  God's  children.” 

Therefore  the  world  knoweth  us  not , because  it  knoweth  Him  not. 
It  knows  Him  not  practically,  because  worldly  men  do  not  love 
or  worship  Him.  “ They  know  not  that  we  are  citizens  of  heaven 
(says  S.  Chrysostom),  and  associates  of  the  Cherubim.  But  they 
shall  know  in  the  day  of  judgment.”  (See  Wisdom  v.  3 seq.) 

Ver.  2. — Beloved \ now  are  we  the  sons  of  God , and  it  doth  not 
yet  appear  what  we  shall  be,  but  we  know  that  when  He  shall 
appear,  we  shall  be  like  Him . Not  in  nature  but  in  quality,  in 
happiness,  in  eternal  glory.  The  world — which  knows  us  not  now, 
because  it  beholds  not  our  inward  beauty — will  then  know  us  as 
like  Christ,  perfectly  holy,  just,  pure,  loving  God.  And  as  God 
enjoys  the  vision  of  Himself,  so  will  our  mind  behold  Him  as  He 
is,  will  be  blessed  in  the  sight,  and  our  sonship  and  adoption  be 
thus  perfected,  when  we  attain  as  the  sons  of  God  our  glorious 
and  happy  inheritance. 

Observe.  We  are  in  three  ways  like  God : — 1.  As  having  a 
rational  and  intelligent  nature.  2.  By  grace,  as  S.  Bernard  says, 
“consisting  in  virtues,  and  the  soul  strives  by  the  greatness  of  its 
virtues  to  imitate  the  greatness  of  the  supreme  God,  and  by  its 
constant  perseverance  in  good  to  imitate  His  unchangeableness 
and  eternity.”  3.  The  highest  and  most  perfect  resemblance  to 
God  will  be  by  the  beatific  glory  in  heaven,  when,  as  S.  Bernard 
says,  “ man  becomes  one  spirit  with  God,  not  merely  by  unity  of 
will,  but  more  expressly  by  not  being  able  to  will  anything  beside, 
through  union  with  His  power.”  This  third  resemblance  then  con- 
sists in  the  Vision  of  the  Triune  God.  As  S.  John  says,  “We  shall 
see  Him  as  He  is.”  Accordingly,  CEcumenius  places  this  resem- 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


40 6 FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  III. 

blance  in  the  love  and  glory  of  adoption.  See  Ps.  xvi.  n,  xlvii.  9, 
xxvi.  4,  xxxv.  10;  1 Cor.  xiiL  12.  The  Schoolmen  thence  teach 
that  the  Blessed  see  the  very  Essence  of  God,  Its  three  Persons 
and  all  Its  attributes.  For  they  behold  Him  in  a vision,  and  draw 
Him  as  it  were  into  themselves,  and  thus  derive  every  good. 
Accordingly  [Pseudo]-S.  Augustine  says  (de  cognit  verce  vitce  ad  fin.), 
“This  vision  and  this  glory  is  called  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
because  it  is  only  the  heavens,  that  is  the  just,  who  enjoy  this 
vision,  for  theirs  is  the  highest  and  chiefest  Good  in  whom  they  have 
the  fulness  of  joy  from  the  fulness  of  all  goods.” 

Again,  in  seeing  God  they  form  his  image  in  their  minds,  which 
thus  represents  Him  to  them.  As  S.  Augustine  says  {Euchind. 
cap . iii.),  “ When  the  mind  is  imbued  with  the  beginning  of  faith 
which  worketh  by  love,  it  strives  by  holy  living  to  reach  that  sight 
wherein  is  that  ineffable  beauty,  which  holy  souls  know,  and  in 
the  full  vision  of  which  is  supreme  happiness.”  And  again,  they 
will  be  like  Him,  as  partaking  of  His  everlasting  blessedness.  See 
S.  Gregory,  Horn,  il  in  Ezek. 

Then  follows  on  this  another  resemblance,  viz.,  in  will,  in  the 
perfect  love  of  God  beheld  and  possessed.  As  S.  Fulgentius  says, 
“We  shall  be  like  Him,  in  imitating  His  righteousness.”  And 
this  love  will  make  a man  love  God  with  all  his  heart  and  soul, 
so  as  to  have  no  wish  or  desire  to  love  anything  else  than  God. 
As  S.  Augustine  says  ( Confessions ),  “When  I cleave  to  Thee  with 
my  whole  heart,  I shall  have  no  pain  or  labour.  My  life  will  be 
full  of  Thee,  but  now,  when  I am  not  full  of  Thee,  I am  a burden 
to  myself.” 

Moreover,  this  love  will  last  for  ever,  and  will  ever  enkindle 
the  blessed  to  praise  God.  (See  S.  Augustine,  Scrm.  cxviil  de 
Divers,  cap.  5.)  “When  we  are  like  to  Him,  never  shall  we  fall 
away,  or  turn  aside.  Let  us  be  sure  then,  the  praise  of  God  will 
never  cloy.  If  thou  failest  in  love,  thou  wilt  cease  to  praise,  but  if 
thy  love  be  never-ending,  never  be  afraid  of  being  unable  to  praise 
Him,  whom  thou  wilt  ever  be  able  to  love.”  And  from  this  glorious 
vision  there  will  follow  all  the  endowments  of  the  glorified  soul 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


LIKENESS  TO  CHRIST. 


407 


and  body  of  Christ,  for  there  will  be  entire  peace,  concord,  and 
harmony  in  all  our  powers  of  action.  Our  bodies  will  be  impas- 
sible, bright,  subtle.  See  1 Cor.  xv.  42.  Just  as  the  sun  shining 
through  a cloud  makes  mock  suns  one  or  more,  so  will  it  be 
with  the  Godhead  as  it  shines  through  the  bodies  and  souls  of 
the  blessed.  And  what  a happy  and  glorious  sight  will  this  be! 
See  CoL  iii.  3 ; 1 Cor.  xv.  45 ; Phil.  iii.  21 ; 2 Cor.  iii.  18 ; Rom.  vL 
5,  viii.  29. 

For  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is.  God  in  His  own  essence,  as  the 
Schoolmen  teach. 

Again,  we  shall  see  Christ  as  man,  clothed  as  man  with  a glorious 
Body  (see  Bellarmine,  de  Beat.  Sand \ i.  3 ; Gregory,  de  Valent.  y & c.) 

And  this  too,  not  in  a glass  and  in  a figure,  but  face  to  face. 
For  in  this  life  we  do  not  see  God  as  He  is,  but  as  He  became 
clothed  with  flesh  for  our  sakes.  (See  S.  Augustine  (in  loc.) . 
Origen,  Horn.  vL  in  Gen. , and  S.  Gregory,  Horn,  il  in  Ezek.) 

Ver.  3. — And  every  one  that  hath  this  hope  in  Him , purifieth 
himself  even  as  He  is  pure.  The  Apostle  next  shows  us  the  way 
to  attain  this  likeness  to  Christ  We  must  put  our  whole  trust  in 
Him.  To  be  like  Him  in  glory,  we  must  strive  to  be  like  Him  in 
holiness,  in  suffering,  and  in  passion.  For  no  one  will  be  like  Christ 
in  heaven,  who  is  unlike  Him  on  earth.  For  it  is  His  to  give  us 
grace  to  lead  us  to  accomplish  so  arduous  a work.  “ The  mercy 
of  God  is  the  ground  for  hoping”  to  strive  after  sanctity.  It  is 
not  enough  to  place  our  hope  in  God  unless  we  put  our  hand  to 
the  work,  and  labour  together  with  Him.  See  Rom.  viii.  17; 
Heb.  xii.  14;  Matt  v.  8.  [Pseudo]- Augustine  admirably  says  (de 
cognit  verce  vitce , in  fin.):  “To  this  highest  good  the  righteous 
are  drawn  by  one  link  after  another.  First  faith,  then  hope,  then 
love,  perfected  in  action,  action  led  on  by  its  intention  to  the 
highest  good,  this  again  issues  in  perseverance,  which  will  bring  us 
even  to  God  Himself,  the  fountain  of  all  good.” 

Purifieth  himself  sanctifieth  himself,  for  sanctity  “is  freedom 
from  every  kind  of  pollution,  the  most  uncontaminated  and  most 
perfect  purity.”  (Dionysius,  de  dip . nom.  cap . xii.) 


-Digitized  by  ^.ooQle 


408  first  epistle  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  III. 

The  true  sanctity  of  men  consists  in  purification  from  sins,  and 
rooting  out  of  vices,  as  S.  Paul  says,  2 Tim.  ii.  21. 

Moreover,  this  cleansing  from  vices  is  effected  by  the  implanting 
and  exercise  of  the  contrary  virtues,  as  the  rooting  out  of  pride  by 
humility,  &c.  Sanctity  then  includes  all  the  virtues  with  which 
the  soul  is  sanctified  and  devoted  to  God.  For  that  is  the  meaning 
of  * sanctus ,*  Some  then  explain  the  word  in  this  sense.  Just  as 
Priests  and  4 Religious 9 dedicate  themselves.  And  indeed  all  the 
faithful  in  a more  imperfect  way  who  are  by  baptism  consecrated 
to  God.  See  1 Pet  ii.  9.  And  Christ  said  (John  xvil  19),  44  / 
sanctify  Myself  (I  offer  myself  as  a holy  victim),  that  they  also 
may  be  sanctified  in  the  truth” 

S.  Gregory  Nazianzen  says,  44 What  is  sanctity?  To  hold  converse 
with  God.”  And  S.  Bernard  (de  Consid.  v.  14)  says,  44  Holy  affec- 
tion, which  is  of  two  kinds,  the  fear  of  God,  and  holy  love,  makes 
a man  holy.  For  a soul  which  is  completely  affected  by  these 
motives,  embraces  Him  with  both  its  arms,  and  says,  I hold  Him 
and  will  not  let  Him  go.”  And  he  says  also  ( Serm . xxv.  inter parvos ), 
“There  are  three  things  which  make  a man  holy, — simple  living, 
holy  deeds,  a pious  intention,”  &c.  (this  is  pursued  at  great  length). 

As  He  is  holy . See  Lev.  xxvi.  and  xxvii.  28.  St  John  enforces 
great  sanctity,  like  the  sanctity  of  God  Himself,  and  continued  and 
daily  progress  therein,  that  we  may  be  more  and  more  like  Him. 
See  Matt.  v.  48. 

If  thou  wishest  to  be  holy,  set  before  thee  the  pattern  of  sanctity, 
the  life  and  passion  of  the  Lord.  As  St.  Ambrose  says  (de  Isaac), 
u Let  every  one  strip  off  the  filthy  wrappings  of  His  soul,  and  prove 
it,  when  cleansed  from  its  filth,  as  gold  in  the  fire.  But  the  beauty 
of  a soul,  when  thus  cleansed,  consists  in  a truer  knowledge  of 
heavenly  things,  and  the  sight  of  that  supreme  Good  from  which 
all  things  depend,  being  Itself  from  nothing.”  And  S.  Gregory 
Nazianzen,  44  Let  us  restore  to  His  image  its  beauty,  let  us  recognise 
oui  dignity,  follow  our  pattern,  learn  the  power  of  the  mystery, 
and  for  what  purpose  Christ  died.  Let  us  be  as  Christ,  since  He 
became  as  one  of  us,  Let  us  be  gods  for  His  sake,  as  He 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


SIN  IS  INIQUITY.  409 

became  man  for  ours.”  And  speaking  of  God  he  says,  “ He  holds 
nothing  so  precious  as  purity  or  cleansing.”  (Orat.  vi.) 

Ver  4. — Whosoever  committeth  sin , also  doeth  iniquity,  for  sin  is 
iniquity . “ For  whosoever  sins,”  says  Bede,  “ acts  contrary  to  the 

equity  of  the  Divine  Law.”  The  faithful  ought  to  sanctify  themselves 
in  order  to  be  like  Christ,  and  on  the  contrary  sin  is  amnia,  a 
breaking  of  the  Divine  Law,  and  makes  us  utterly  unlike  God,  and 
hateful  to  Him.  He  means  “ deadly  sin.”  S.  Augustine  ( contr . 
FaUst.  xxii.  7)  says,  that  “sin  is  anything  we  say,  do,  or  desire, 
against  the  Divine  Law.”  And  S.  Ambrose  (de  Farad . cap . 8),  “Sin 
is  disobedience  to  the  Divine  commands.”  In  like  manner  iniquity 
is  a departure  from  the  equity  which  the  law  prescribes,  and  injustice 
is  contrary  to  justice,  and  dvo/ria  is  what  is  contrary  to  law.  Sin 
and  iniquity  mean,  in  S.  John,  the  same  thing,  though  in  popular 
speech  iniquity  has  a worse  meaning  than  sin.  See  S.  Gregory,  Mor. 
xi.  ai.  S.  Ambrose  (Apol.  Dav . cap . 13)  says  the  exact  contrary, 
regarding  sin  as  the  worse  of  the  two. 

But  every  sin,  even  against  human  or  ecclesiastical  law,  is  contrary 
to  God,  as  being  contrary  to  His  eternal  law,  which  is  the  source  of 
all  law.  As  S.  Thomas  says  (1.  2,  qucest.  91),  “Law  is  the  highest 
reason  existing  in  the  Divine  mind,  according  to  which  He  directs 
the  actions  of  all  creatures  to  their  own  proper  ends.  For  as  there 
is  in  God  the  reason  for  His  creating  things,  so  also  is  the  law  by 
which  they  are  to  be  governed.  And  as  the  one  is  the  conception 
in  the  Divine  mind,  which  decided  how  they  were  to  be  made,  so  is 
the  other  that  eternal  law,  by  which  every  creature  should  discharge 
its  own, functions,  together  with  the  will  which  obliges  them,  or  at 
least  impresses  on  them  an  inclination,  to  follow  it. 

Ver.  5. — And  ye  ktmv  that  He  was  manifested  to  take  away  our  sins. 
That  is  Christ.  “ And  He  takes  away  our  sins,  ” says  Bede,  “ by  forgiv- 
ing the  sins  which  have  been  done,  by  keeping  us  from  doing,  and  by 
leading  us  to  that  life  where  they  cannot  be  committed.”  The  word 
alpi ¥ and  the  Syriac  nasa,  both  of  them  signify  to  bear , and  take 
away . Both  meanings  are  suitable  here.  See  Is.  liii.  4,  6,  and  1 1 \ 
John  i.  9;  1 Pet.  ii.  24;  Rom.  iii.  25. 


Digitized  by 


410  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  III. 


Morally . Here  learn  what  a grave  evil  sin  is,  for  Christ  to  come 
down  from  heaven,  to  suffer  and  be  crucified  in  order  to  take  it  away. 
And  to  teach  us  that  we  should  endure  every  kind  of  suffering  to 
take  away  sin  and  to  convert  sinners.  “ No  room,”  says  (Ecumenius, 
“ is  left  for  sin,  for  since  Christ  came  to  destroy  it,  being  Himself 
entirely  free  from  sin,  you  who  have  been  born  again,  and  confirmed 
in  the  faith,  have  no  right  to  sin.”  Each  one  of  the  faithful  should 
then  make  it  his  work  to  crush  sin  in  himself  and  others,  just  as  they 
would  destroy  serpents'  eggs  or  young  wolves. 

And  in  Him  is  no  sin.  For  He  was  all-powerful  to  destroy  sin, 
being  in  His  own  nature  sinless  by  reason  of  the  hypostatical  union. 
For  by  this  union  the  Divine  Person  of  the  Word  so  guided  His 
manhood  in  all  its  actions,  that  it  could  not  sin  even  in  the  slightest 
degree,  for  otherwise  the  sin  and  offence  would  have  affected  the 
Person  of  the  Word,  which  is  an  impossible  thing,  for  its  actions 
would  have  been  the  actions  of  that  very  Person  who  was  bound  to 
keep  from  sinning  that  nature  which  It  had  assumed. 

Lastly,  “ the  will  of  Christ  was  so  deified,  as  undoubtedly  not  to 
oppose  the  will  of  God,”  as  S.  Gregory  Nazianzen  says  ( Oral . 
xxxvi.)  And  S.  Cyril  (de  recta  fide ) says,  “ That  the  Word  had  as 
thoroughly  imbued  the  soul  of  Christ  with  His  own  holiness,  as  a 
fleece  takes  in  the  colour  in  which  it  has  been  dipped.”  S.  John 
here  quotes  Isa.  liil  9.  See  also  Heb.  vii.  26.  S.  Augustine  here 
says,  “ Because  there  was  no  sin  in  Him,  He  came  to  take  away 
sin.  For  had  there  been  sin  in  Him,  it  would  have  had  to  be  taken 
from  Him,  and  He  would  not  have  taken  it  away.” 

Whosoever  ahideth  in  Him , sinneth  not.  As  long  as  He  abides  in 
Christ.  For  grace  and  sin  are  as  contrary  to  each  other,  as  heat  and 
cold,  black  and  white,  and  because  the  grace  of  Christ  strengthens 
a man  to  overcome  all  sin.  “ And  he,”  says  CEcumenius,  “ abides 
in  Christ  who  constantly  exercises  his  powers,  and  never  ceases  from 
exercising  them.” 

Whosoever  sinneth  hath  not  seen  Him  neither  knoweth  Him.  “ Hath 
not  seen  Him  in  His  manhood  : not  known  Him  in  His  Godhead, 
by  faith,”  says  the  Gloss.  But  this  is  too  subtle  a distinction.  The 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


KNOWING  THE  SAME  AS  LOVING. 


411 

two  words  mean  the  same  thing.  For  he  who  sins  knows  not  Christ, 
because  he  considers  not  His  boundless  love,  our  Redemption  by 
Him,  and  the  reward  promised  to  the  righteous,  and  the  punishments 
prepared  for  sinners.  For  did  he  carefully  consider  them,  he  would 
assuredly  not  sin.  Whence  S.  Basil  says  (Reg.  lxxx.  in  fin.),  “ What 
is  the  characteristic  of  a Christian  ? To  set  God  always  before  him.* 

Again,  he  who  sins  knows  not  Christ,  with  that  savour  of  know- 
ledge and  affection  which  is  conjoined  with  love  and  charity.  He 
knows  not  that  loves  not  Christ,  does  not  strive  to  please,  or  be 
acceptable  to  Him.  For  did  he  truly  love  Christ,  he  would,  under 
any  temptation,  say  with  Paul,  “ Who  shall  separate  us,”  &c.,  Rom. 
viii.  35 ; or  with  the  Bride,  Cant,  viil  7,  “ Many  waters  shall  not 
quench  love,”  &c.  S.  John  everywhere  in  this  epistle  speaks  of 
‘ knowing * in  the  sense  of  loving  or  esteeming. 

Bede  says,  “ Every  one  that  sinneth  hath  not  seen  Him  or  known 
Him,  for  had  he  tasted  and  seen  how  sweet  the  Lord  is,  he  would  not 
by  sin  have  cut  himself  off  from  seeing  His  glory,”  &c.  And  Didymus, 
“ Every  one  who  sins  is  estranged  from  Christ : has  no  part  in  Him, 
or  knowledge  of  Him,”  &c. 

Ver.  7. — Little  children,  let  no  man  deceive  you.  Neither  Simon 
nor  the  Gnostics,  who  teach  that  a man  is  justified  by  faith  only,  and 
that  good  works  are  not  required  in  order  to  his  justification,  and 
that  if  a man  retains  faith  he  can  love  as  he  pleases.  S.  Peter, 
James,  and  John,  all  of  them  opposed  this  heresy. 

He  that  doeth  righteousness  is  righteous.  Not  merely  some  works 
of  righteousness,  but  perfect  and  entire  righteousness.  For  no  one 
can  completely  fulfil  the  law  of  God,  unless  by  grace  and  love,  which 
the  righteous  alone  has.  See  James  ii.  10. 

(2.)  S.  John  here  contrasts  the  children  of  God,  and  the  children 
of  the  devil.  See  above  ii.  29.  He  here  speaks  of  righteousness,  in 
a general  sense,  as  the  aggregate  of  all  virtues. 

(3.)  He  who  doeth  righteousness  is  righteous , because  his  acts,  which 
flow  from  a habit  of  righteousness,  prove  him  to  be  righteous ; and 
they  also  gain  for  him  an  increase  of  righteousness.  And  also  because 
he  should  ever  exercise  himself  in  works  of  righteousness,  if  he 


By  Google 


412  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  III. 


wishes  to  preserve  it.  The  Apostle  speaks  not  of  the  infusion,  but 
of  the  exercise  of  righteousness,  says  Thomas  Anglicus. 

Morally . S.  John  teaches  us  that  the  righteous  man  should  ever  be 
advancing  in  righteousness,  like  the  Bride  in  Cant  ch.  vi.  io,  and 
Prov.  iv.  15.  S.  Augustine  says,  “That  the  whole  life  of  a good 
Christian  is  a holy  longing.”  See  Phil.  iii.  14;  Ezek.  i.  12,  of  the 
four  living  creatures  ; S.  Gregory,  Horn,  iii. ; S.  Bernard,  Ep . ccliv. ; 
S.  Basil,  Hexaem.  Horn.  xi.  ; and  S.  Jerome,  ad  Celantium . 

Even  as  He  is  righteous . See  Ps.  xv.  10,  cxi.  7,  cxlv.  13. 

The  word  * as  * does  not  signify  equality,  but  resemblance.  No 
creature  can  equal  the  righteousness  and  holiness  of  the  Creator,  but 
he  can  imitate  it.  Just  “ as  a mirror  represents  the  image  of  a man, 
not  the  man  himself, ” says  Bede.  Hear  S.  Augustine : “ He  is  pure 
from  eternity,  we  from  faith.  We  are  righteous,  even  as  He  is 
righteous.  But  He  is  so  in  His  perpetual  unchangeableness,  we  are 
righteous  by  believing  in  Him  we  see  not,  in  order  that  we  may  see 
Him  hereafter.  But  not  even  when  our  righteousness  is  perfected, 
and  when  we  become  equal  to  the  angels,  shall  we  become  equal  to 
Him.  How  far  then  is  our  righteousness  from  His  now,  when  even 
then  it  will  not  be  equal  to  His  ? ” 

Ver.  8. — He  who  committeth  sin  is  of  the  devils  because  he  follows 
his  practices  and  suggestions.  To  be  of  the  devil  is  to  imitate  the 
devil.  For,  as  S.  Augustine  says,  “The  devil  made  no  man,  begat 
no  man,  but  whoever  imitates  the  devil,  is  born  of  him,  by  imitating 
him,  and  not  actually  by  being  born  of  him.”  He  then  who  sinneth 
is  of  the  devil  as  his  follower  and  imitator,  and  not,  as  the  Manichees 
dreamed,  as  being  descended  from  him.  There  is  a similar  phrase, 
Ezek.  xvi.  3,  respecting  wicked  Jews. 

For  the  devil  sinneth  from  the  beginnings  not  from  the  first  moment 
of  his  creation,  but  shortly  after  it.  And  this  was  the  beginning  of 
sin.  As  S.  Augustine  says  (in  loci)  and  S.  Cyril  (Cateeh.  ii.),  the 
devil  is  the  beginning  of  sin,  and  the  father  of  the  wicked.  To 
which  Didymus  adds,  “ He  infuses  the  first  suggestions  of  sin,  and 
lastly  he  perseveres  in  his  sin,  as  the  Ps.  [lxxiv.  ult.]  says,  “ The  price 
of  them  that  hate  Thee  ever  rises  up.” 


: - ‘-Digitized  by 


Google 


BLESSING  OF  THE  PASCHAL  CANDLE. 


413 


S.  John  alludes  to  his  own  Gospel,  viii.  44 ; on  which  Isidorus 
(He  Surntno  Bono , i.  3)  remarks,  “ He  abode  not  in  the  truth,  because 
he  fell  as  soon  as  he  was  made.  He  was  created  in  the  truth,  but 
by  not  standing  therein  he  fell  from  the  truth.”  To  which  Bede 
adds,  “ He  never  ceased  to  sin,  unrestrained  either  by  his  enormous 
sufferings,  nor  by  the  dread  of  sufferings  to  come.  And  he,  therefore, 
who  neglects  to  keep  himself  from  sin  is  rightly  said  to  be  from  him.” 
He  explains  further  that  his  sin  was  pride,  and  rebellion  against  God. 

For  this  purpose  was  the  Son  of  God  manifested)  that  He  might 
destroy  the  works  0}  the  devil \ To  loose,  that  is,  for  sins  are  the 
cords  which  the  devil  twines,  to  entangle  and  ensnare  the  sinner. 
See  Prov.  v.  22 ; Isa.  v.  10.  And  Christ  gave  His  Apostles  power  to 
burst  those  bonds  asunder. 

It  is  clear  from  this  that  Christ  would  not  have  been  incarnate  if 
Adam  had  not  sinned,  though  some  of  the  Schoolmen  think  other- 
wise. But  both  Scripture  and  the  Fathers  give  no  other  reason  for 
His  Incarnation  than  our  redemption  from  sin.  See  Nicene  Creed. 
And  the  Church  sings  at  the  blessing  of  the  Paschal  candle  (using 
the  words  of  S.  Gregory),  O most  necessary  sin  of  Adam,  which 
was  blotted  out  by  the  death  of  Christ.  O blessed  sin  which  required 
so  great  a Redeemer.  So  S.  Ambrose,  S.  Augustine,  S.  Leo,  and 
others. 

Ver.  9. — And  he  cannot  sin , because  he  is  born  of  God.  Hence 
Jovinian,  Luther,  and  Calvin  taught  that  a man  could  not  fall  away, 
but  was  sure  of  his  salvation.  But  S.  John  says,  “ My  little  children^ 
these  things  write  I unto  you9  that  ye  sin  not.”  Consequently  they 
could  sin,  faithful  though  they  were.  And  it  is  contrary  to  daily 
experience,  for  we  find  daily  the  faithful  becoming  heretics  and 
falling  into  sin.  And  the  Council  of  Trent  (vi.  23)  rules  otherwise. 
What  then  is  S.  John's  meaning  that  he  who  is  born  of  God  cannot 
sin,  that  is  mortally  and  gravely?  1.  We  must  take  the  word  col- 
lectively— and  then  it  will  mean,  So  long  as  he  preserves  the  seed 
of  grace,  he  cannot  sin.  So  CEcumenius,  Thomas  Anglicus,  Cajetan, 
and  S.  Hierom,  lib . n contra  fovin.  And  accordingly  theologians 
say  that  he  who  has  effectual  grace  cannot  sin,  because  effectual  grace 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


414  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  III. 

in  its  very  conception  includes  its  result.  For  that  grace  is  called 
* effectual’  which  (as  is  foreseen)  will  produce  its  effect,  which  is 
to  lead  our  free  will  to  co  operate  in  a good  work.  But,  speaking 
abstractedly,  he  who  has  effectual  grace  can  resist  it,  and  commit 
sin.  (See  Cone.  Trid.  sess.  vi.  can.  4.) 

2.  He  who  is  born  of  God  cannot  (in  a formal  sense)  commit  sin, 
that  is  as  far  as  relates  to  his  heavenly  new  birth.  For  if  this  be 
allowed  to  act,  and  is  not  withstood  by  our  free  will,  it  is  fully  able 
to  keep  out  all  sin.  (See  S.  Augustine,  de  grat.  Christiy  cap . xxi.) 
Thus  Adam  is  said  in  his  state  of  innocence  to  have  been  immortal, 
because  he  could  not  die,  as  long  as  he  remained  therein.  But  as 
he  could  fall,  so  also  could  he  die.  Thus  we  say  that  this  medi- 
cine, e.g.y  is  so  powerful  that  any  one  who  takes  it  could  not  die  of 
the  plague.  But  a man  refuses  to  take  the  medicine  and  then 
dies ; so  can  he  who  has  the  grace  of  God  refuse  to  use  it,  and  thus 
fall  into  sin.  S.  John  here  distinguishes  between  the  supernatural 
action  of  Divine  grace,  and  the  exercise  of  moral  virtues,  the  first 
of  these  preventing  every  sin,  while  the  others  do  not.  But  the  habit 
of  temperance  is  not  lost  by  one  act  of  intemperance,  even  as  temper- 
ance is  not  acquired  by  a single  act  of  temperance.  Again,  the  grace 
of  Christ  is  distinguished  from  the  grace  given  to  Adam,  which  gave 
the  power  but  not  the  will,  whereas  the  grace  of  Christ  gives  both 
the  will  and  the  power.  See  S.  Augustine  (de  corrupt,  et  gratia) , “ It 
is  so  provided  (to  meet  the  weakness  of  the  human  will),  that  Divine 
grace  never  fails,  is  never  overpowered  by  any  difficulty,  so  as  ever 
to  resolutely  will  that  which  is  good,  and  obstinately  refuse  to 
abandon  it.”  And  it  is  thus  that  he  explains  the  words  of  S.  John, 
“ Every  one  that  is  born  of  God  sinneth  not.” 

3.  He  cannot  sin.  He  sins  with  difficulty.  He  has  no  wish  to 
sin,  says  (Ecumenius.  Others  explain  the  words,  He  has  power  not 
to  sin,  this  power  being  given  him  by  God. 

4.  Rightfully  and  properly  he  cannot  sin,  though  he  may  in  fact 
sin  against  all  that  is  right  and  proper. 

5.  Gagneius  says,  “He  cannot  sin,  i.e.  by  unbelief,  which  S.  John 
calls  a sin  unto  death.” 


•-  Digitized  by 


Google 


HOLY  INSPIRATIONS. 


415 


6.  Some  take  these  words  as  referring  to  those  who  are  predesti- 
nated and  absolutely  elected  to  eternal  life.  But  this  must  be 
understood,  not  of  antecedent,  but  consequent  impossibility,  which 
consists  with  our  liberty  of  will,  as  including  and  presupposing  it 

The  first  and  second  of  these  explanations  seem  to  be  the  best. 

Anagogically.  S.  Augustine  (de  peceat.  et  merit  ii.  7)  says  that  the 
righteous  man  cannot  sin,  by  reason  of  his  hope  of  eternal  life. 

In  like  manner  he  says  (de  nupt.  et  concup.  L 23,  and  de  Spirit 
et  lit  cap.  ult ),  “We  cannot  observe  perfectly  in  this  life  the  two 
commandments,  ‘Thou  shalt  not  covet,’  and  ‘Thou  shalt  love  the 
Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,’  &c.  But  we  are  exhorted  to  attain 
to  that  place  where  we  shall  perfectly  fulfil  them.  It  is  impossible 
not  to  feel  concupiscence  in  this  world,  but  we  are  directed  not  to 
yield  to  it  And  the  same  with  the  other  commandment,  ‘Thou 
shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God.’  See  Rom.  vii.  7.” 

Morally . S.  John  here  teaches  us  an  easy  and  certain  way  of 
avoiding  sin,  namely,  by  carefully  attending  to  those  holy  inspirations 
which  God  suggests,  and  thus  shut  out  from  our  minds  all  the  evil 
suggestions  of  the  devil.  For  he  who  sins  must  needs  give  way  to 
evil  thoughts,  for  we  cannot  desire  or  wish  anything  unless  the  mind 
suggests  it  to  us  as  a good  to  be  desired.  And  accordingly  the 
Blessed  cannot  sin,  because  they  behold  God  as  their  chief  and 
boundless  good,  and  are  swallowed  up  in  Him  as  the  very  abyss  of 
all  good.  S.  Francis  Xavier  used  for  this  very  reason  to  occupy 
himself  in  good  thoughts,  in  ruminating  on  some  holy  sentence  of 
Scripture,  or  the  doings  or  virtues  of  some  saint.  For  the  mind  in 
this  way  drives  out  all  other  thoughts  which  lead  to  sin.  And  so  with 
regard  to  our  will.  For  he  who  fixes  his  mind  on  holy  affections 
and  desires  cannot  give  his  mind  to  evil  lusts,  and  consequently  can- 
not sin.  He  says  with  Joseph,  “ How  can  I do  this  wickedness  and 
sin  against  God  ? ” See  Gen.  xxxix.  9.  As  S.  Leo  says  (Serm.  viiL 
de  Epiphany ),  “ He  who  wishes  to  learn  whether  God  dwells  within 
him,  should  honestly  examine  the  secrets  of  his  heart,  and  carefully 
ascertain  with  what  humility  he  resists  pride,  with  what  good  will  he 
strive  against  envy,  how  he  is  not  charmed  with  flattering  tongues, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


416  first  epistle  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  III. 

and  how  pleased  he  is  at  another’s  happiness.  Whether  he  does  not 
render  evil  for  evil,  and  would  rather  pass  over  injuries  than  mar  in 
himself  the  image  of  Him  who  sends  His  rain  upon  the  just  and 
unjust,  and  makes  His  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil  and  on  the  good 
And  not  to  enter  on  a more  minute  enquiry,  let  him  see  whether  he 
find  within  him  such  love  of  God  and  his  neighbour,  as  to  wish  to 
render  even  to  his  enemies  that  which  he  desires  to  be  rendered 
to  himself.” 

For  His  seed  remaineth  in  him,  CEcumenius  by  the  * seed  * under- 
stands Christ.  See  Gal.  iii.  29.  (2.)  S.  Augustine  and  others  under- 
stand by  it  the  word  of  God.  See  Luke  viii.  n ; James  i.  18; 
1 Pet.  i.  23.  (3.)  Lyra,  Hugo,  Cajetan,  and  Thomas  Anglicus  most 

fitly  understand  by  it  the  grace  of  God.  For,  1.  All  other  virtues 
spring  from  it.  2.  Because  it  is  the  seed  of  glory.  (See  D.  Thom. 
par,  i.  qucest . 62,  art,  3.)  3.  Because  as  a seed  must  die  in  order  to 
bear  fruit,  so  does  grace  suffer  death  and  martyrdom,  from  whence 
all  good,  both  public  and  private,  proceeds.  See  John  xii.  24. 

Ver.  10. — In  this  the  children  of  God  are  manifest \ and  the  children 
of  the  devil.  The  two  tests  are,  the  doing  righteousness,  and  loving 
his  brother.  Righteousness  and  charity  are  of  God,  unrighteousness 
and  hatred  are  of  the  devil.  Righteousness  is  here  taken  in  its  widest 
sense,  as  including  all  virtues.  But  St.  John  here  states  that  among 
all  kinds  of  righteousness  none  shows  more  that  we  are  the  sons  of 
God,  than  charity  and  the  love  of  our  neighbour,  as  the  contrary 
vices  show  us  to  be  the  children  of  the  devil.  And  hence  S.  John, 
the  beloved  disciple,  breathes  forth  love  only.  Hear  S.  Augustine 
(in  loc.) : “ Love  alone  distinguishes  between  the  children  of  God  and 
the  children  of  the  devil.  Let  all  sign  themselves  with  the  sign  of 
the  cross,  let  all  answer  Amen,  let  all  sing  Alleluia,  let  all  be  baptized, 
let  all  go  to  church,  let  all  build  churches.  Yet  the  sons  of  God  are 
distinguished  from  the  children  of  the  devil  only  by  charity.  They 
who  have  charity  are  born  of  God,  they  who  have  it  not  are  not  born 
of  God.  Have  what  thou  wilt ; if  this  alone  thou  have  not,  it  pro- 
fiteth  thee  nothing.  If  thou  hast  not  anything  else,  have  this : thou 
hast  fulfilled  the  law.”  But  by  charity  God  is  loved  for  His  own 


Bigiti-zed  by 


Google 


CHARITY. 


417 


sake,  and  our  neighbour  for  the  sake  of  God.  Whence  charity  is 
“the  fulfilling  of  the  law.”  Rom.  xiii.  10.  And  S.  Augustine  (*& 
Nat  et  Grot,  cap . xlii.) : “ Charity  is  the  most  true,  complete,  and 
perfect  righteousness.”  S.  Clement  Alex,  calls  it  “The  highest 
duty  of  a Christian  man.”  S.  Cyprian  ( de  Bono  Patient ) terms  it 
“ The  foundation  of  peace,  the  firm  bond  of  unity,  surpassing  even 
the  deeds  of  martyrdom.”  S.  Basil,  “The  root  of  the  commandments.” 
S.  Gregory  Nazianzen  ( Epist . xx.),  “ The  head  of  all  our  teaching.” 
S.  Jerome  (Epist  ad  Theophylact\  “The  parent  of  all  virtues.”  S. 
Ephraim  (de  Humil.),  “ The  support  of  all  virtues.”  S.  Augustine, 
“ The  stronghold  of  all  virtues  ” (Serm.  liii.  de  temp.)  Prosper  (de 
Vita  Contempt  iii.  13),  “The  most  powerful  of  all  our  affections,  the 
sum  of  good  works,  the  protector  of  virtue,  the  end  of  heavenly 
precepts,  the  death  of  sins,  the  life  of  virtues.”  “ Firmness  in  every 
virtue”  (S.  Cyril).  “The  mother  and  guardian  of  all  good”  (S. 
Gregory).  “ The  mother  of  men  and  angels,  bringing  peace,  not  only 
to  all  things  in  earth,  but  even  in  heaven  ” (S.  Bernard,  Epist  ii.) 

Lastly,  S.  Basil  says,  “Where  charity  fails,  hatred  comes  in  its 
room.  But  if  God  (as  S.  John  says)  is  love,  the  devil  must 
undoubtedly  be  hatred.  And  as  he  who  has  love  has  God,  so  he 
who  has  hatred,  fosters  a devil  within  him.” 

Ver.  1 1. — For  this  is  the  message , ever  to  be  announced  by  us  the 
Apostles  of  Christ.  It  is  the  message  of  good  tidings,  which  Christ 
brought  from  heaven.  He  might  have  exacted  from  us  many  hard 
and  painful  sufferings.  But  He  is  satisfied  if  we  love  each  other. 
And  what  is  more  joyous,  pleasant,  and  easy  than  this?  For  as 
God  ordered  us  to  love  our  brethren,  He  orders  our  brethren  to  love 
us  in  return — love  in  this  way  eliciting  and  demanding  love. 
See  John  xv.  12.  On  which  S.  Augustine  remarks  that  charity  is 
here  distinguished  from  mere  human  love.  We  should  love  men, 
not  merely  as  men,  but  as  we  love  ourselves  as  the  children  of 
the  Most  Highest. 

Ver.  12. — Not  as  Cain.  For  he  loved  himself  only,  and  hated  his 
brother  because  he  saw  that  his  offering  was  acceptable  to  God.  As 

God  says  to  Cain  (according  to  LXX),  “ {last  thou  not  sinned,  if  thou 

vol,  v,  3 p 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


41 8 FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  TIL 

offerest  rightly,  but  dividest  not  rightly?  ” “ For  Cain  did  this,”  says 

S.  Augustine  (de  Civ . xv.  7).  “ Giving  to  God  something  which  was 

His,  but  gratifying  himself.  Which,”  says  he,  “ all  who  do  not  follow 
the  will  of  God,  but  their  own  will,  and  in  their  perversity  of  heart 
make  Him  an  offering  with  which  they  think  He  can  be  bought  off, 
and  this  too  even  to  gratify  their  depraved  desires.”  And  accordingly 
Eusebius  (de  Prcep . xi.  4)  says  that  he  was  appositely  called  Cain 
from  the  Hebrew  word  kana  to  envy.  See  S.  Gregory,  Mor.  x.  6 \ 
S.  Chrysostom,  in  Matt  xviii.,  where  he  speaks  of  nine  degrees  of 
love;  and  S.  Augustine  (de  JDoci . Christ , i.  22),  who  says,  “The 
rule  of  love  is  laid  down  by  God.  And  in  saying  ‘ the  whole  heart,* 
&c.,  He  left  no  portion  of  our  life  unemployed,  and  left  no  room 
for  the  enjoyment  of  ought  beside.  So  that  whatever  else  comes 
into  our  minds  as  an  object  of  love,  it  should  be  swept  away  into 
the  full  current  of  our  complete  love  for  Him.  He  then  who  loves 
his  neighbours  aright,  should  at  the  same  time  love  God  with  all 
his  heart  and  mind.  And  thus  loving  his  neighbour  as  himself,  he 
should  refer  all  his  love  of  himself  and  his  neighbour  to  that  love  of 
God,  who  suffers  not  a single  drop  to  be  withdrawn  from  Him,  so 
as  to  diminish  our  love  for  Him.” 

Who  was  of  that  wicked  one . Cain  was  not  of  God,  but  of  the 
devil,  by  imitating  him,  and  listening  to  his  suggestions.  For  when 
the  devil  could  not  injure  God  Himself,  he  sought  to  injure  man 

who  was  His  image ; the  malignity  of  Cain,  and  of  the  devil  also, 

consists  in  hatred  and  envy.  Such  too  is  the  life  of  tyrants,  who  like 
fishes  prey  upon  those  who  are  weaker  than  themselves.  A fish 
was  a type  of  envy.  (See  S.  Clement,  Strom,  lib.  v.) 

And  wherefore  slew  he  him  l Because  his  own  works  were  evil. 
Because  he  took  little  account  of  God,  and  offered  Him  the  poorer 
victims,  reserving  the  better  ones  for  himself,  and,  moreover,  envied 
Abel,  who  by  the  more  excellent  offerings  he  made  was  the  more 
acceptable  to  God.  From  this  envy  sprang  hatred  and  ultimately 

murder.  S.  Cyprian  dwells  on  this  at  great  length  in  his  treatise 

u de  zelo  et  livore .” 

But  his  brothers  righteous.  Innocent,  righteous,  and  holy.  For 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


RIGHTEOUS  ABEL. 


419 


he  esteemed  God  above  himself,  and  therefore  presented  the  best 
offerings  he  could.  There  were  three  special  grounds  for  praising 
him,  his  virgin  life,  his  priesthood,  and  his  martyrdom.  (As  the 
writer  of  the  Qucestioncs  ad  Orosum  says);  and  S.  Cyprian  (de 
Bona  Patient .)  calls  him  the  Protomartyr.  So  also  Rupert  in  Isa. 
lix.;  S.  Jerome  iv.  42  ; S.  Augustine  (< contr . Faust \ xii.  9 and  10),  and 
others.  S.  Augustine  commences  his  “City  of  God”  from  Abel, 
and  the  city  of  the  devil  from  Cain.  See  Book  xv.  8. 

Ver.  13. — Marvel  not , my  brethren , if  the  world  hate  you . This  is 
an  inference  from  the  previous  antithesis  of  the  children  of  God,  and 
the  children  of  the  devil  Our  Lord  alludes  to  the  hatred  of  wicked 
men  against  Christ  in  S.  John  xv.  18.  Everything  is  opposed  to 
and  hates  its  contrary,  as  black  is  opposed  to  white,  cold  to  heat, 
sweetness  to  bitterness,  &c.  The  world  hates  the  faithful — 1st.  Be- 
cause their  ways  of  going  on  are  so  different.  See  Wisdom  ii.  15. 
And  S.  Leo  ( Serm . ix.  de  Quadrig,),  “ Wickedness  never  is  at  peace 
with  righteousness.  Drunkenness  ever  hates  temperance,  &c. ; and 
so  obstinate  is  this  opposition,  that  when  there  is  peace  without  there 
is  war  within,  so  that  it  never  ceases  to  disquiet  the  hearts  of  the 
righteous ; and  it  is  true  that  they  who  wish  to  live  godly  in  Christ 
Jesus  will  suffer  persecution,  and  that  our  whole  life  is  a temptation.” 
And  he  gives  as  another  reason  the  craft  and  malice  of  the  devil, 
who  when  he  cannot  overpower  our  virtue  would  undermine  our 
faith. 

2d.  There  is  further  the  envy  which  worldlings  feel  when  they 
see  that  the  righteous  are  not  ensnared  by  their  evil  desires,  but 
are  stedfastly  going  on  towards  heaven,  while  they  themselves 
are  sinking  down  and  down  to  hell. 

3d.  They  hate  the  righteous,  because  they  withdraw  themselves 
from  their  company.  See  Matt.  xv.  18 ; Wisdom  ii.  16. 

4th.  Because  their  conduct  is  a tacit  reproof  to  the  worldly. 
See  Wisdom  ii.  12  ; and  John  xv.  8. 

5th.  Worldlings  are  full  of  self-love,  but  Saints  are  full  of  the  love 
of  God,  for  which  reason  they  hate  them. 

S.  James  (iv.  4)  agrees  with  S.  John,  and  so  does  S.  Paul,  Gal 


Digitized  by  -Google 


420  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  III. 


i.  io.  Tertullian  and  others  read  here,  “ Be  not  afraid,”  for  some  not 
only  marvelled,  but  were  afraid  of  the  hatred  they  would  incur  in 
becoming  Christians.  S.  John  therefore  exhorts  them  not  to  be 
surprised  or  afraid,  for  those  whom  the  world  hates  God  loves. 
“ It  would  be  a greater  wonder,”  says  Didymus,  “ if  wicked  men 
did  love  those  who  were  godly.”  We  must  not  therefore  in  the 
least  regard  the  hatred  of  such  persons,  but  rather  persevere  in  holi- 
ness and  love  of  God,  and  make  it  our  endeavour  to  make  them 
our  friends  when  they  hear  that  we  surpass  them  in  charity. 

As  S.  Peter  says,  i Pet.  iv.  12.  And  Seneca  (de  Prov.  cap.  L) 
says,  “ God  brings  not  up  a good  man  in  delicate  ways ; He  makes 
trial  of  him,  He  hardens  him,  and  thus  prepares  him  for  Himself, 
while  the  man  himself  considers  all  misfortunes  as  means  of  training, 
and  as  teaching  him  how  much  his  patience  can  bear.”  And  S. 
Basil  (adm.  ad  filii  spirit)  says  that  “ Patience  is  the  highest  virtue 
of  the  mind,  enabling  us  most  speedily  to  attain  the  height  of  per- 
fection.” S.  Augustine  gives  the  reason,  that  God,  through  the 
hatred  of  the  world,  may  draw  us  on  to  love  Himself.  <c  Oh  the 
unhappiness  of  mankind  ! The  world  is  bitter,  and  yet  is  loved. 
But  how  much  more  would  it  be  loved,  if  it  were  sweet!  How 
gladly  wouldest  thou  gather  its  flowers,  since  thou  withdrawest  not 
this  hand  even  from  its  thorns.” 

Ver.  14. — We  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto  life.  Not 
because  we  believe  that  we  are  predestinated,  but  as  a moral  cer- 
tainty, by  the  testimony  of  a good  conscience,  by  the  innocency  of 
our  life,  and  the  consolation  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  S.  John  says  this 
for  their  consolation  and  to  keep  them  from  dreading  the  hatred 
of  the  world.  Be  comforted  by  the  thought,  that  by  faith  ye  have 
been  translated  from  the  death  of  sin  to  a state  of  grace  in  this 
world,  and  in  the  world  to  come  to  glory,  which  will  raise  us 
above  all  hatred.  And  the  clear  proof  of  this  is  that  we  love  the 
brethren.  For  this  love  is  an  undoubted  sign  and  effect  of  sanctify- 
ing grace,  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit  Himself,  from  whom,  as  from  an 
uncreated  source,  all  love  proceeds.  S.  Basil  truly  says,  “ When  can 
a man  be  fully  persuaded  that  God  has  remitted  his  sins  ? When 


WHAT  tS  THE  DEATH  OF  THE  SOUL?  43 1 

he  finds  that  his  feelings  are  like  his  who  said,  * I have  hated  and 
abominated  iniquity*  (Ps.  cxix.  163).** 

He  gives  here  three  signs  of  indwelling  grace  and  righteousness. 
(1.)  Hatred  of  sin ; (2.)  mortifying  the  flesh,  and  all  evil  desires  • 
and  (3.)  zeal  for  the  salvation  of  others,  like  S.  Paul  (2  Cor.  xi.  29). 
And  S.  Gregory  {Dial.  L 1),  “The  mind  which  is  filled  with  the 
Divine  Spirit,  furnishes  its  own  proofs,  viz.,  virtuous  actions  and 
humility.  And  if  those  perfectly  co-exist  in  the  same  mind,  it  is  clear 
that  they  witness  to  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.”  And  S.  Leo 
(, Serm . de  Epiph.  viii.)  gives  these  three  signs  of  grace  and  sanctity, 
humility,  forgiveness  of  injuries,  and  doing  as  we  would  be  done  by 
And  “let  every  one  who  is  such,  doubt  not  that  God  rules  and 
dwells  within  him.” 

He  who  loveth  not  (when  he  ought,  or  he  who  hates)  abideth  in 
death, , with  the  stain  of  habitual  sin,  which  abides  after  the  act  of  sin 
is  over;  and  from  this  he  cannot  escape,  except  by  the  grace  of 
Christ,  says  Thomas  Anglicus.  But  how  the  soul  though  immortal 
can  yet  die  through  sin,  S.  Augustine  explains  (de  Civ . iii.  1),  “The 
death  of  the  soul  takes  place  when  God  forsakes  it,  just  as  the  body 
dies  when  the  soul  leaves  it.  It  is  then  the  entire  death  of  a man, 
when  the  soul  which  has  been  forsaken  of  God,  leaves  the  body,  for 
in  this  case  it  does  not  itself  live  by  God,  nor  does  the  body  live 
through  it.”  And  in  like  manner  S.  Cyril  Alex,  says,  “ Death,  pro- 
perly speaking,  is  not  that  which  separates  body  and  soul,  but  that 
which  separates  the  soul  from  God.  God  is  life,  and  he  who  is  cut 
off  from  Him,  perishes.” 

Nay  more,  this  death  of  the  soul  is  absolutely  termed  death  in  our 
deeper  teaching,  for  that  death  of  the  body  which  we  dread  so  much 
is  but  a shadow  and  image  of  that  true  death,  and  not  to  be  com- 
pared with  it.  See  S.  Gregory  {Mor.  iv.  17).  And  S.  Augustine  (de 
Civ.  vi.  cap.  ult.),  “ If  the  soul  lives  in  everlasting  punishment,  it 
should  rather  be  called  everlasting  death,  and  not  life.”  And  S. 
Basil  (Horn.  v.  on  the  Martyr  Julitta ) says,  “ Sin  is  the  death  of  the 
soul,  which  would  else  be  immortal.  It  deserves  to  be  lamented 
with  inconsolable  grief,”  &c.  And  S.  Jerome,  on  Isa.  xiv.  (Lib.  vi.), 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


422  first  epistle  general  of  s.  John,  c.  m. 


terms  a sinner  “ the  devil*s  carcase,  for  no  one  can  doubt  that  sin 
is  a most  foetid  thing,  when  the  sinner  himself  says,  ‘ My  wounds 
stink  and  are  corrupt*  ** 

Ver.  15. — Whosoever  hateth  his  brother  is  a murderer . As  he  said 
before,  “He  that  loveth  not  abideth  in  death.”  S.  John  counts 
‘not  loving*  and  ‘hating*  as  the  same  thing,  by  miosis , when  little 
is  said,  but  more  is  meant,  and  also  because  want  of  love  is  counted 
as  constructive  hatred.  Moreover,  he  who  hates  his  brother  is  in 
will  and  desire  a murderer.  See  S.  Jerome  (Epist.  xxxvi.  ad 
Castorin.)  and  S.  Matt  v.  28,  and  hatred  moreover  disposes  to 
murder,  as  desire  disposes  to  adultery. 

Mystically . He  who  hates  his  brother  murders  his  own  soul.  As 
S.  Ambrose  says,  “He  who  hates  murders  himself  in  the  first  place, 
slaying  himself  with  his  own  sword.”  And  S.  Gregory  (A/or.  x.  n) 
says  the  same  thing  more  at  length.  Again,  “ he  who  hates  his 
brother,  ofttimes  destroys  his  soul,  by  provoking  him  to  anger  and 
contention.” 

[Pseudo]-Alexander  says,  “ He  who  calumniates  his  brother  is  a 
murderer,  and  no  murderer  hath  any  part  in  the  kingdom  of  God.” 
For,  as  Dionysius  says,  there  are  three  kinds  of  murder,  Bodily, 
Detraction,  and  Hatred. 

Hath  not  eternal  life  abiding  in  him . Hath  not  grace  abiding 
in  him,  nor  doth  he  abide  in  that  grace  whereby  eternal  life  is 
obtained.  It  is  a metonymy,  say  Cajetan  and  others.  Or  else  he 
will  not  have  eternal  life ; he  cannot  have  it,  the  present  being  taken 
for  the  future  tense.  Which  comes  to  this,  He  who  hateth,  hath 
no  hope  of  eternal  life,  but  abideth  in  the  death  of  sin.  As  S. 
Augustine  says  (Prcef  in  Ps.  xxxi.),  “ As  an  evil  conscience  is  full 
of  despair,  so  is  a good  conscience  full  of  hope ; as  Cain  said,  ‘ From 
Thy  face  shall  I be  hid,  and  shall  be  a fugitive  and  a vagabond  on 
the  earth,*”  &c. ; as  S.  Jerome  says,  “ Whosoever  finds  me  out,  from 
the  trembling  of  my  body  and  the  agitation  of  my  mind,  will  know 
that  I deserve  to  die.”  Just  as  Orestes  for  the  murder  of  his  mother 
was  continually  harassed  by  the  Furies. 

Ver.  16. — Hereby  we  know  the  love  of  God,  because  He  laid  down 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


WHAT  IS  A FRIEND  > 


An 


His  life  for  us : and  we  ought  to  lay  down  our  lives  for  the  brethren. 
S.  John  here  goes  back  to  the  law  and  living  pattern  of  perfect 
charity,  even  Christ,  who  by  laying  down  His  life  for  us,  taught  us  in 
like  manner  to  lay  down  our  lives  for  the  brethren.  For  in  Him 
there  shone  forth  that  boundless  love  which  far  exceeds  the  love  of 
all  parents  and  kinsfolk.  For  He,  the  Infinite  God,  laid  down  His 
life  for  us  unworthy  and  ungrateful  sinners,  with  great  suffering  and 
shame  to  Himself,  and  thus  tacitly  gave  us  a pattern  for  us  to 
imitate,  by  laying  down  our  lives  for  the  brethren. 

But  yet  we  must  not  risk  our  own  salvation  in  order  to  save  the 
souls  of  others,  though  we  are  bound  to  risk  our  life  for  their 
salvation,  which  is  of  more  value  than  our  own  earthly  life,  which 
we  must  undoubtedly  sacrifice  for  the  eternal  good  of  others,  as  S. 
Paul  did  and  the  other  martyrs. 

But  you  will  ask,  are  we  bound  to  risk  our  own  lives  for  the  sake 
of  the  lives  of  others?  In  ordinary  cases,  No,  but  in  extraordinary 
cases,  Yes.  As  when  bound  by  oath  or  promise,  or  in  defence  of 
our  country.  But  a friend  is  not  bound  to  risk  his  own  life  for  that 
of  his  friend,  since  that  would  be  to  love  his  neighbour  even  more 
than  himself,  which,  S.  Augustine  says  (de  Mend.  cap.  io),  goes 
beyond  the  rule  laid  down.  But  yet  to  do  so  would  be  laudable, 
for  a man  would  risk  his  life  for  the  sake  of  honour,  and  for  the 
virtue  of  friendship.  And  this  is  a spiritual  good,  higher  than  life 
itself.  So  S.  Augustine  teaches  (de  Amic.  cap . io) ; and  S.  Jerome 
on  Micah  vii.  says,  “ When  a man  was  asked,  What  is  a friend  ? he 
replied,  ‘A  second  self.1  And  accordingly  two  Pythagoreans  gave 
themselves  up  to  the  tyrant  as  mutual  pledges  for  each  other.”  (See 
S.  Ambrose,  Off.  lib.  iii. ; Fr.  Victoria,  Relect.  de  Homicid. ; Soto,  de 
fust.  i.  6 ; and  S.  Thomas,  2.  2,  q.  26,  art.  4,  ad  2).  And  Valentia 
adds  this  case,  “ Ought  a man  to  suffer  himself  to  be  killed  rather 
than  kill  his  assailant?”  And  he  rules  that  he  ought  rather  to  be 
killed  himself,  than  kill  another  who  would  die  in  the  very  act  of 
sin.  We  should  also  risk  our  life  to  preserve  another's  chastity.  As 
the  soldier  who  saved  Theodora  by  changing  clothes  with  her  in 
prison,  and  who  in  the  end  suffered  with  her.  And  Paulinus,  who 


Digitized  by 


4^4  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  III. 


became  a slave  in  the  place  of  a widows  son  (slavery  being  a kind 
of  civil  death),  and  who  was  highly  praised  for  his  act  by  S.  Augus- 
tine and  other  fathers. 

Instances  are  also  given  from  heathen  authors  of  those  who  gave 
up  their  lives  for  their  friends,  which  is  the  highest  proof  of  love. 
See  John  xv.  13. 

Ver.  17. — But  whoso  hath  this  world's  goods , and  sceth  his  brother 
have  need \ and  shutteth  up  his  bowels  of  compassion  from  him,  how 
dwelleth  the  love  of  God  in  him  l He  deduces  this  as  a consequence 
from  the  former  verse.  It  is  an  argument  from  the  less  to  the 
greater.  If  the  love  of  Christ  obliges  us  to  lay  down  our  lives  for 
the  brethren  (which  is  most  difficult),  much  more  does  it  oblige  us 
to  give  alms  to  the  needy,  which  is  most  easy.  And  again,  our 
laying  down  our  lives  for  the  brethren  is  a case  which  seldom 
happens,  the  duty  of  relieving  the  needy  frequently  occurs.  So 
(Ecumenius  and  S.  Augustine. 

Many  doctors  argue  from  this  passage  that  the  precept  of  alms- 
giving is  binding  not  only  in  extreme  but  even  in  grave  cases  of 
necessity,  so  that  a rich  man  is  obliged  to  give  up,  not  only  super- 
fluities, but  even  things  necessary  for  his  station,  if  he  can  avert  in 
this  way  a grave  loss  to  his  neighbour.  (See  Gregory,  de  Valent. 
Tom.  iii.  Disput.  iii. ; and  Bellarmine,  de  bonis  Oper.  lib.  iii.  See 
Eccles.  iv.  1,  S.  Ambrose,  de  Off.  iii  31 ; S.  Gregory  Nazianzen, 
de  cura  pauper ; and  S.  Chrysostom,  de  Eleemos.) 

And  shutteth  up  his  bowels  from  him.  The  bowels  being  the  seat 
of  compassion  and  pity.  See  Lam.  ii.  n ; Col.  iii.  12.  They  are 
the  symbols  of  paternal  as  well  as  of  maternal  love.  See  Phile.  7, 
and  Je.  lviii.  7.  This  teaches  that  alms  should  be  given  with  much 
kindness  and  affection.  As  S.  Gregory  says  (Moral,  xx.  16),  " Let 
the  hard  and  merciless  hear  the  thundering  words  of  the  wise  man, 
Prov.  xxi.  13.” 

Salvian,  lib.  iv.,  exhorts  the  faithful  to  put  on  these  bowels  of 
mercy,  when  teaching  that  Christ,  in  the  persons  of  the  poor,  is  a 
mendicant  and  in  need  of  everything,  and  that  they  are  cruel  who 
squander  their  goods  on  their  relations  who  are  in  no  need,  and 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


LOVE  IN  DEED. 


42S 


suffer  Christ  in  the  person  of  the  poor  to  be  in  want,  . . . He  shows 
that  they  have  no  faith,  and  that  they  do  not  believe  in  Christ,  who 
promised  abundant  rewards  to  His  almoners.  . . . And  next  he  shows 
that  they  greatly  sin,  not  only  because  they  do  not  relieve  the  poor, 
but  also  bestow  those  goods  which  they  have  laboriously  acquired, 
on  those  who  misapply  them  for  purposes  of  display,  gluttony,  and 
luxury.  " If  thou  wishest  to  have  eternal  life  ” (he  continues),  “ and 
to  see  good  days,  leave  thy  substance  to  the  saints  that  are  in  want, 
to  the  lame,  the  blind,  the  sick ; let  thy  means  be  sustenance  to  the 
wretched,  thy  wealth  the  life  of  the  poor,  and  may  the  refreshment 
thou  givest  them  be  thy  own  reward,  that  their  refreshment  may 
thus  refresh  thee.”  He  concludes  by  severely  inveighing  against 
them,  and  more  especially  against  ecclesiastics,  who  are  particularly 
bound  to  relieve  the  poor,  and  not  to  enrich  their  kinsfolk  out  of 
the  funds  of  the  Church,  which  Prosper  calls  the  patrimony  of  the 
poor.  See  S.  Bernard  ( Epist.  xxiv.),  who  says  that  a bishop  must 
not  indulge  in  luxuries,  but  merely  live  on  the  funds  of  the  Church  : 
everything  more  which  thou  takest  out  of  them  is  robbery  and 
sacrilege.  See,  too,  S.  Basil  on  Luke  xii.  18.  The  Stoics  thought, 
on  the  contrary,  that  pity  was  no  virtue,  but  rather  the  mark  of  a 
weak  mind.  See  Seneca  (de  Clem . ii.  5)  and  Plautus,  as  quoted  by 
Lactantius,  xi.  11,  who  condemns  any  giving  of  alms  as  being  a 
waste,  and  an  injury  to  the  recipient  Valerius  (Max.  iv.  8),  on  the 
other  hand,  records  with  approval  the  bountifulness  of  a certain 
Silleus. 

Ver.  18. — My  little  children , let  us  not  love  in  word , and  in  tongue, 
but  in  deed  and  in  truth . He  condemns  here  all  false  charity,  which 
exhibits  itself  in  words  only,  as  S.  James  (ii.  15)  does  also.  S.  Gregory 
(Moral,  xxi.  14)  says  that  our  charity  must  ever  be  exhibited  in 
reverent  words,  &c.,  and  in  ministering  bountifully.  And  S. 
Bernard  (in  Cant  ii.  4)  explaining  the  words,  “ He  ordered  charity 
in  me  ” (see.  Vulg.)  says,  “ He  requires  not  the  craft  of  the  lying 
tongue,  nor  the  taste  of  affected  wisdom.  Let  us  love  in  deed  and 
in  truth,  being  moved  to  good  deeds  by  the  impulse  of  living  charity 
rather  than  by  any  affected  love.  Give  me  a man  who  loves  God 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


426  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  III. 

with  all  his  heart,  himself  and  his  neighbours,  and  everything  else 
relating  to  God  with  well-ordered  love,  and  I boldly  pronounce  him 
to  be  a wise  man,  to  whose  taste  all  things  seem  to  be  just  as  they 
really  are,  and  who  can  in  truth  safely  say,  Because  He  hath  ordered 
love  in  me.  But  who  is  he  ? ” 

But  observe  here,  that  if  any  one  cannot  succour  in  deed  and  act 
(as,  e.g.y  being  too  poor),  yet  he  can  do  so  in  words  and  kind 
feelings.  And  again,  he  who  gives  relief  should  not  give  it  grudg- 
ingly, or  with  words  of  reproof,  but  cheerfully  and  kindly.  See 
Rom.  xii.  8 ; Eccles.  xviii.  15. 

S.  Gregory  {Horn.  iii.  in  Evatig.)  says  well,  “Let  not  any  one 
credit  himself  with  anything  which  his  mind  suggests,  unless  his 
acts  bear  witness  to  it  For  in  loving  God,  our  tongue,  our  thoughts, 
and  our  life  are  all  required.  Love  towards  Him  is  never  idle. 
It  worketh  great  things  if  it  really  exist,  but  if  it  refuses  to  do  so, 
it  is  not  love.”  And  S.  Chrysostom  {Horn,  liii.  ei  lxviii.  ad  pop.) 
says,  “ The  more  thou  givest  to  God,  the  more  does  He  love  thee, 
and  to  those  He  loves  more,  He  gives  more  grace ; when  He  sees 
any  one  to  whom  He  owes  nothing,  He  flies  from  him,  and  avoids 
him ; but  when  He  sees  any  one  to  whom  He  owes  something,  He 
runs  up  to  him  at  once.  Thou  shouldest  therefore  do  everything 
to  make  God  thy  debtor.”  And  then  he  explains  how  this  can  be 
done,  viz.,  by  showing  mercy  to  the  poor.  “ Give  largely,  that  thou 
mayest  be  rich,  scatter  abroad,  that  thou  mayest  gather  in,  imitate 
a sower.  Sow  in  blessings,  that  thou  mayest  reap  in  blessings.” 
And  S.  Leo  (Sernt  vi.  de  fejun.  x.  Mensis)  says,  “Persevere,  O 
Christian,  in  thy  bounty,  give  that  which  thou  wilt  receive  back 
again,  sow  what  thou  wilt  reap,  scatter  that  which  thou  wilt  gather 
up.  Fear  not  the  cost,  be  not  anxious  or  doubtful  about  the  result. 
Thy  substance,  when  well  laid  out,  is  increased,  and  to  wish  for 
rightful  profit  for  thy  piety,  is  to  traffic  for  the  gain  of  an  eternal 
reward.  He  who  rewardeth  thee  wishes  thee  to  be  munificent,  and 
He  who  gives  that  thou  hast,  orders  thee  to  give  it  away,  saying, 
( Give,  and  it  shall  be  given/  and  so  on.”  S.  Chrysostom  accordingly 
said  rightly,  “ that  almsgiving  was  of  all  things  the  most  gainful” 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


CONFIDENCE  IN  GOD. 


427 


Ver.  19. — Hereby  we  know  that  we  are  of  the  truth , that  we  have 
true  love,  that  we  are  the  sons  of  truth,  of  true  and  genuine  charity. 

Secondly,  we  are  of  God,  who  is  the  chief  and  highest  truth, 
and  true  charity.  See  John  xiv.  6,  xviii.  37.  And  accordingly  S. 
Augustine  rightly  concludes  (de  Moribus  Eccl.  cap . xxxiii.),  “ Let  our 
meals,  our  words,  our  dress,  our  appearance  be  blended  with  charity, 
and  be  united  and  joined  together  in  one  charity ; to  violate  this  is 
counted  as  sinning  against  God  ...  if  only  this  be  wanting,  every- 
thing else  is  vain  and  empty  ; where  it  exists  is  perfect  fulness.” 

And  shall  assure  our  hearts  before  Him.  (r.)  Hugo,  Lyranus,  and 
Dionysius  explain,  We  shall  induce  our  hearts  to  please  God  daily 
more  and  more.  (2.)  Ferus  explains  it,  We  shall  gain  confidence 
to  ask  anything  of  God.  (3.)  We  shall  have  our  hearts  at  peace, 
for  we  shall  persuade  them  that  we  are  striving  after  true  charity, 
when  we  love,  not  in  word,  but  in  deed  and  in  truth.  (4.)  The 
sense  most  clearly  is  this,  We  shall  approve  our  hearts  to  God  in 
manifesting  the  fruits  of  love.  We  can  lie  to  men  by  pretending 
love  in  our  hearts,  but  we  cannot  lie  to  God,  who  sees  the  heart. 
They  then  who  love  their  neighbour  in  deed  and  in  truth  fear  not 
the  eye  and  judgment  of  God,  but  would  boldly  appear  in  His 
sight,  lay  their  hearts  before  Him,  and  show  that  they  were  resting 
on  real  charity.  So  CEcumenius ; and  see  Gal.  i.  10,  “Do  I wish  to 
persuade  men  or  God  ? ” That  is,  I strive  to  prove  my  cause  to 
God.  So  S.  Chrysostom.  S.  Augustine  reads  in  this  passage,  “I 
wish  to  make  myself  approved  to  God,  and  not  to  men.”  As  S. 
Augustine  ( contra  Secundi \ num.  i.  1)  says,  “Think  as  you  please 
about  Augustine,  provided  only  my  conscience  accuses  me  not  in 
the  sight  of  God.” 

Morally . S.  John  here  teaches  us  to  examine  all  our  deeds  by 
the  rule  of  God’s  judgment.  For  frequently  we  are  deceived  into 
thinking  that  we  are  acting  purely  from  the  love  of  God,  when  in 
fact  we  are  acting  from  the  impure  motive  of  self-love.  Before 
beginning  anything  conform  thyself  to  this  rule,  act  as  in  the  sight 
of  God,  who  sees,  and  will  call  thee  to  account  Do  it  as  though 
it  were  thy  very  last  act.  And  in  any  doubt,  adopt  that  course 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OE  S.  JOHN,  C.  lit 


which  thou  wouldest  wish  thou  hadst  adopted  when  thou  comest 
to  die.”  So  did  the  Psalmist  (Ps  xvi.  8)  ; Elisha  (2  Kings  iii.  14) ; 
and  S.  Paul  (2  Cor  i.  12). 

And  S.  Francis  Xavier,  “ Wherever  I am,  I would  remember 
that  I am  on  the  stage  of  the  world.”  And  Campion,  when  about 
to  suffer  martyrdom,  said,  “ We  are  made  a spectacle  to  the  world, 
and  to  angels,  and  to  men”  (1  Cor  iv.  9).  Let  us  imitate  these, 
and  thus  “shall  we  persuade  our  hearts  in  His  sight.” 

Ver.  20. — For  if  our  heart  condemn  us,  God  is  greater  than  our 
heart , and  knoweth  all  things.  If  we  cannot  conceal  our  hypocrisy 
from  our  own  hearts,  much  less  can  we  conceal  it  from  God,  who 
is  greater  and  deeper  even  than  our  own  heart,  who  is  more  inti- 
mately acquainted  with  it,  and  is  nearer  to  it  than  we  are  ourselves. 
If  thy  conscience  condemns  thee,  how  much  more  will  God,  who 
rules  over  and  judges  thy  conscience?  “If  we  cannot  hide  any- 
thing from  our  conscience,”  says  CEcumenius,  “ how  can  we  hide  it 
irom  God  who.is  ever  present  ? ” “Thou  hidest  thy  conscience  from 
man,”  says  S.  Augustine,  “hide  it  from  God  if  thou  canst.  Let  thy 
conscience  bear  thee  witness,  for  it  is  of  God.  And  if  it  is  of  God, 
do  not  boast  of  it  before  men,  because  the  praises  of  men  exalt 
thee  not,  nor  do  their  reproofs  bring  thee  down.  Let  Him  see  thee 
who  crowneth  thee:  let  Him,  by  whose  judgment  thou  wilt  be 
crowned.”  Diadochus  says  (de perf  Spirit . cap . c.),  “The  judgment 
of  God  is  far  above  that  of  our  conscience.”  See  1 Cor.  iv.  1 and  Ps. 
lxiii.  (Vulg.  7).  “ Man  will  go  down  to  his  deep  heart,  and  God  will 

be  exalted,”  that  is,  man  will  think  many  evils  in  the  depth  of  his 
heart,  but  God  will  be  deeper  than  it.  But  Lyra,  Aquila,  and 
Theodotion  read  iorem,  will  shoot  at  it  See  A.  V. 

Thomas  Anglicus  merely  applies  the  passage  thus,  If  the  sin  of 
the  heart  is  great,  greater  is  God's  compassion  in  forgiving.  And 
God  too  is  greater  than  our  heart,  because  He  alone  satisfies  the 
desires  of  our  heart,  and  even  overflows  and  surpasses  them. 

Ver.  21. — If  our  heart  condemn  us  not , then  have  we  confidence 
towards  God,  viz.,  that  we  shall  obtain  from  Him  all  that  we  ask. 
See  Ps.  cxix.  6.  The  contrary  is  the  case  with  the  wicked.  See 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


WHEN  PRAYER  IS  CERTAIN  TO  BE  HEARD.  429 

Prov.  xxviii.  9,  as  S.  Gregory  says  (Mor.  x.  15,  or  17),  “He  who 
remembers  that  he  still  refuses  to  listen  to  the  command  of  God, 
doubts  whether  he  will  obtain  what  he  wishes  for.  And  our  heart 
blames  us  when  we  pray,  when  it  calls  to  mind  that  he  opposes  the 
will  ot  Him  whom  he  is  addressing.  ‘ As  oil  makes  the  light  to 
shine,  so  do  good  deeds  give  confidence  to  the  soul.’  ” 

Ver.  22. — And  whatsoever  we  ask , we  receive  of  Him . Whatever, 
that  is,  that  is  good,  and  tends  to  the  glory  of  God  (see  John  v.  14). 
Because  we  keep  His  commandments , and  do  those  things  that  are 
pleasing  in  His  sight  For  it  is  only  a fitting  thing  that  if  man  do 
the  will  of  God,  He  on  His  side  should  do  the  will  of  man.  (See 
Ps.  cxiv.  19.)  He  alludes  to  Christ’s  promise  (John  xv.  7).  For 
deeds  ought  to  be  supported  by  prayer,  and  prayer  by  deeds.  As 
S.  Gregory  says  ( Epist . ix.  45),  “ Prayer  is  void,  when  our  deeds 
are  wicked,  for  they  outweigh  the  force  of  our  prayers.”  See  Lam. 
iii.  41.  On  which  Rabanus  remarks,  “ He  lifts  up  his  heart  with 
his  hands  who  supports  his  prayers  with  his  deeds.  For  whosoever 
prays  and  makes  believe  to  work,  lifts  up  his  heart,  and  not  his 
hands ; while  he  who  works,  and  prays  not,  lifts  up  his  hands,  and 
not  his  heart,”  &c.  The  Laconians  had  a proverb,  that  we  must 
first  put  our  hand  to  the  work,  and  then  pray  to  fortune.  S.  John 
here  teaches  that  our  prayer  is  strengthened  by  confidence,  and  that 
confidence  springs  from  obedience.  See  Isa.  i.  15 ; Matt.  ii.  2 ; 
Prov.  xxviii.  9;  Ps.  1.  16,  xll  13,  xxxiv.  16,  xxxiii.  20,  xxxvii.  4,  x. 
67.  He  hears  not  only  our  prayers,  but  our  thoughts  and  desires. 
S.  Dominic  said  that  he  never  asked  anything  from  God  which  he 
did  not  obtain.  So  also  S.  Thomas  Aquinas,  S.  Scholastica,  S. 
Catherine  of  Siena,  and  others. 

And  do  thou  things  that  are  pleasing  in  His  sight  That  is  to  say 
His  commands,  and  also  evangelical  counsels  (of  perfection).  For 
he  who  strives  perfectly  to  please  God,  includes  not  merely  His 
commands  and  precepts,  but  also  His  smallest  hints  and  counsels. 
And  this,  as  it  is  a hard  matter,  so  is  it  most  pleasing  to  God.  And 
hence  S.  Bernard  ( Serm . i.  de  dedic . Eccl.)  calls  a monk  a standing 
miracle.  All  our  holiness  then  consists  in  our  ever  studying  and 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


430  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  III. 


endeavouring  to  please  God.  For  this  is  an  act  of  most  pure  and 
constant  love. 

Observe  that  love  is  of  two  kinds,  desire  and  friendship.  The 
first  is  that  with  which  we  study  to  please  God,  that  we  may  obtain 
from  Him  the  reward  of  eternal  glory.  But  this  is  rather  an  act  of 
hope  than  of  love.  (See  Ps.  cxix.  112;  see  Vulgate,  propter  retri- 
butionem.)  But  the  love  of  friendship  is  that  which  makes  us  strive 
to  please  Him  merely  out  of  love,  and  by  doing  those  things  in 
which  He  takes  delight  and  pleasure. 

Our  Lord  had  this  love  from  the  very  moment  of  His  conception, 
and  all  His  earthly  life  through.  See  John  viii.  29 ; Ps.  xl.  9 ; 
Rom.  xii.  2 ; Col.  i 9.  And  accordingly  wise  men  teach  that  it  is 
an  excellent  practice  to  think  every  day,  What  does  God  wish  me 
to  do  at  this  very  moment  ? Just  as  the  servants  of  a king  watch 
his  every  movement,  and  fly  rather  than  go  to  do  his  bidding. 
Much  more  should  we  obey  God  in  all  things,  for  He  is  the  Supreme 
Majesty,  Justice,  and  holiness,  the  highest  wisdom,  goodness,  and 
power,  the  Supreme  Lord,  Lawgiver,  Judge,  and  Punisher  of  all  men. 
And  moreover,  He  who  created  us,  preserves,  redeems,  and  sanctifies 
us,  and  pours  down  on  us,  every  instant,  innumerable  blessings.  See 
S.  Gregory  (Mor.  vi.  12).  And  the  Abbot  Ammon  {apud.  S.  Ephr. 
in  parcen .)  says,  “ Desire  to  fulfil  the  will  of  God  at  all  times,  as 
being  indeed  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  the  crown  of  a perfect 
life,  and  as  believing  with  all  thy  heart,  that  it  far  surpasses  all 
human  wisdom.”  The  Abbot  John  (see  Cassian,  de  Instil . renunc. 
v.  28)  said  that  “ he  had  never  done  his  own  will.”  And  Aloysius 
Gonzaga  said  that  he  had  no  scruple  even  about  his  excessive 
austerity,  because  he  had  done  nothing  except  by  the  will  of  God, 
of  which  his  superior  was  the  interpreter.  This  is  what  God  praises, 
Is.  lxii.  4,  “My  delight  is  in  her”  (Heph-zibah),  and  S.  Bernard, 
Serm.  xxxviii.  in  Cant. 

Ver.  23. — And  this  is  His  commandment } that  we  should  believe 
in  the  Name  of  His  Son  Jesus  Christ  That  is,  in  the  Person  thus 
named.  See  Phil.  ii.  9.  And  (2)  that  we  should  love  one  another . 
On  these  two  commandments  all  the  rest  depend.  For  to  believe 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


ABIDING  IN  GOD. 


4*T 

in  Christ  includes  loving,  worshipping,  and  obeying  Him,  believing 
Him  also  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  and  thus  believing  in  God  the 
Father  also.  And  the  command  to  love  our  neighbour  presupposes 
the  love  of  God.  See  Matt.  xxii.  40.  S.  Augustine  ( Confess . x.  29) 
says,  “ He  loves  Thee,  O God,  but  little,  who  loves  anything  together 
with  Thee,  which  He  loves  not  for  Thy  sake.  O thou  love  that 
ever  bumest,  and  art  never  extinguished ! O my  love,  my  God, 
enkindle  me.  Thou  commandest  continence : give  what  Thou  com- 
mandest,  and  command  what  Thou  wilt.” 

As  He  gave  us  a commandment.  This  signifies  that  Christ  specially 
and  frequently  enjoined  the  duty  of  mutual  love  on  His  apostles, 
and  required  them  to  inculcate  it  on  the  faithful. 

Ver.  24. — And  he  that  keepeth  His  commandments  dwelleth  in 
Himy  and  He  in  him . The  word  ‘abideth’  signifies  indwelling, 
intimate  union  and  intercourse.  God  then  dwells  in  the  person  who 
obeys  Him. 

1.  By  virtue  of  the  command.  For  the  law  and  the  maker  ol 
the  law  abide  in  those  who  are  under  it,  just  as  the  doctrine  of  the 
teacher  abides  in  him  who  takes  it  in,  and  he  who  is  subject  to  the 
law,  abides  therein  by  discipline  and  obedience. 

2.  By  love,  for  he  who  keeps  the  commands  of  God  loves  Him,  and 
is  loved  by  Him,  just  as  he  who  loves  abides  in  the  object  he  loves, 
for  the  soul  abides  more  in  the  object  it  loves,  than  in  him  whom 
it  animates,  and  God  abides  in  a soul,  both  as  loving  it,  and  as  loved 
by  it  For  “ he  who  cleaveth  to  the  Lord  is  one  spirit.”  1 Cor.  vi. 
17  ; and  S.  Bernard,  Serm . xxxi.  in  Cant. 

3.  He  who  loves  and  obeys  God  abides  in  Him  as  being  under 

His  protection,  and  God  abides  in  him  by  the  protection  He  gives. 
Ps.  xci.  1,  and  Zech.  ii.  8.  “ He  who  toucheth  you,  toucheth  the 

apple  of  mine  eye,”  naming  the  dearest  and  the  tenderest  part  ot 
the  body ; see  also  Gen.  xv.  1,  Ps.  xxxi.  3.  Whence  Bede  says, 
“ Let  God  be  thy  house,  and  be  thou  the  house  of  God.  Abide  in 
God,  and  let  God  abide  in  thee.  God  abideth  in  thee,  to  keep 
thee ; thou  abidest  in  God,  lest  thou  shouldest  fall.  Observe  His 
commandments,  hold  fast  charity,  tear  not  thyself  from  His  faith, 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


432  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  III. 


that  thus  thou  mayest  glory  in  His  presence,  now  by  faith,  and  here- 
after by  sight.  And  He  will  abide  in  thee  for  ever,  as  the  Psalmist 
says  (Ps.  v.  12).”  And  S.  Chrysostom,  on  Rom.  viii.  14,  says,  “ To 
obtain  the  inheritance  of  children,  it  is  not  sufficient  to  be  once 
imbued  with  the  Spirit,  unless  we  are  ever  led  by  His  guidance, 
for  He  is  the  steersman  and  the  guide  of  our  soul,  leading  us  into 
battle  against  spiritual  wickedness  in  high  places."  (4.)  God 
abides  in  him  who  loves  Him,  as  locally  placed  in  Him.  For  a 
holy  soul  is  the  throne,  the  temple,  and  abode  of  God.  See  1 
Cor.  iii.  17 ; Is.  lxvi.  1 and  2,  &c.  (5.)  And  lastly,  God  abides  in  a 
righteous  man  substantially,  because  He  communicates  His  essence 
and  substance  to  him,  making  him  partaker  of  the  divine  nature, 
2 Pet.  i.  4. 

And  hereby  we  know  that  He  abideth  in  us,  by  the  Spirit  which 
He  hath  given  us . See  Rom.  v.  5,  also  below,  iv.  16.  So  S. 

Augustine,  Bede,  CEcumenius,  and  others.  S.  Augustine  says,  “ This 
connection  clearly  shows  that  brotherly  love,  which  we  see  so 
authoritatively  preached,  is  not  merely  from  God,  but  is  God  Him- 
self. When  therefore  we  love  our  brother  with  the  highest  love 
( dilectione ),  we  love  our  brother  for  the  sake  of  God." 

We  know . Not  by  special  and  divine  faith,  not  even  with 

absolute  certainty,  but  with  moral  and  conjectural  certainty,  from 
outward  signs  and  tokens ; and  the  more  a man  experiences  them, 
the  more  certain  is  he  that  he  is  in  a state  of  grace,  and  the  more 
he  grows  in  virtue  the  more  certain  does  he  become.  And  there- 
fore Andreas  Vega  teaches  that  holy  men  can  have  such  certainty 
as  to  exclude  all  doubt.  But  this  is  the  lot  of  very  few  and  of 
pre-eminent  saints ; and  yet  even  those,  if  they  look  at  their  own 
infirmity,  might  perchance  be  afraid  of  being  deceived  in  this  matter, 
though  in  fact  they  may  have  no  fear.  As  S.  Jerome  says  (on 
Micah  vi.),  “ We  ought  at  no  time  to  be  secure,  but  always  to  look 
forward  to  the  day  of  judgment”  And  S.  Gregory  (Epist.  lib . vi.  22), 
“Thou  shouldest  not  feel  secure,  but  till  the  very  end  of  thy  life 
shouldest  ever  suspect  thyself,  and  fear  committing  sin."  And  S. 
Bernard  (Serm.  iii.  de  Adv .),  “ I know  neither  my  own,  or  my  neigh* 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


ABIDING  IN  GOD. 


433 


hour’s  conscience  (though  I ought  to  watch  over  them).  Both  are  an 
inscrutable  abyss,  both  are  dark  as  night”  (See  Cone.  Trid.  sess.  vi. 
cap . 1 6.)  The  confidence  and  certainty  of  holy  men  should  ever  be 
blended  with  fear,  as  St.  Paul  says,  Phil.  i.  n.  For  God  wishes 
that  this  fear  should  be  a bridle  to  keep  us  low,  and  also  a spur  to 
stimulate  our  virtue. 


VOL.  v. 


2 E 


boogie 


( 434  ) 


CHAPTER  IV. 

I  He  warneth  them  not  to  believe  all  teachers , who  boast  of  the  Spirit , but  to  try 
them  by  ike  rules  of  the  catholick  faith  : 7 and  by  many  Masons  exhorteth  to 
brotherly  love. 

BELOVED,  believe  not  every  spirit,  but  try  the  spirits  whether  they  are  of 
God  : because  many  false  prophets  are  gone  out  into  the  world. 

2  Hereby  know  ye  the  Spirit  of  God  : Every  spirit  that  confesseth  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh  is  of  God : 

3  And  every  spirit  that  confesseth  not  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh  is 
not  of  God : and  this  is  that  spirit  of  antichrist,  whereof  ye  have  heard  that  it 
should  come ; and  even  now  already  is  it  in  the  world. 

4  Ye  are  of  God,  little  children,  and  have  overcome  them  : because  greater  is 
he  that  is  in  you,  than  he  that  is  in  the  world. 

5  They  are  of  the  world  : therefore  speak  they  of  the  world,  and  the  world 
heareth  them. 

6  We  are  of  God : he  that  knoweth  God  heareth  us ; he  that  is  not  of  God 
heareth  not  us.  Hereby  know  we  the  spirit  of  truth,  and  the  spirit  of  error. 

7  Beloved,  let  us  love  one  another ; for  love  is  of  God  5 and  every  one  that 
loveth  is  born  of  God,  and  knoweth  God. 

8  He  that  loveth  not  knoweth  not  God ; for  God  is  love. 

9  In  this  was  manifested  the  love  of  God  towards  us,  because  that  God  sent 
his  only  begotten  Son  into  the  world,  that  we  might  live  through  him. 

10  Herein  is  love,  not  that  we  loved  God,  but  that  he  loved  us,  and  sent  his 
Son  to  be  the  propitiation  for  our  sins. 

II  Beloved,  if  God  so  loved  us,  we  ought  also  to  love  one  another. 

12  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time.  If  we  love  one  another,  God  dwelleth 
in  us,  and  his  love  is  perfected  in  us. 

13  Hereby  know  we  that  we  dwell  in  him,  and  he  in  us,  because  he  hath  given 
us  of  his  Spirit. 

14  And  we  have  seen  and  do  testify  that  the  Father  sent  his  Son  to  be  the 
Saviour  of  the  world. 

15  Whosoever  shall  confess  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,  God  dwelleth  in  him, 
and  he  in  God. 

16  And  we  have  known  and  believed  the  love  that  God  hath  to  us.  God  is 
love ; and  he  that  dwelleth  in  love  dwelleth  in  God,  and  God  in  him. 

17  Herein  is  our  love  made  perfect,  that  we  may  have  boldness  in  the  day  of 
judgment : because  as  he  is,  so  are  we  in  this  world. 

18  There  is  no  fear  in  love ; but  perfect  love  casteth  out  fear : because  fear  hath 
torment.  He  that  feareth  is  not  made  perfect  in  love. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


DIVERSE  SPIRITS. 


435 


19  We  love  him,  because  he  first  loved  us. 

20  If  a man  say,  I love  God,  and  hateth  his  brother,  he  is  a liar  : for  he  that 
loveth  not  his  brother  whom  he  hath  seen,  how  can  he  love  God  whom  he  hath 
not  seen  ? 

21  And  this  commandment  have  we  from  him,  That  he  who  loveth  God  love 
his  brother  also. 

i.  Most  dearly  beloved, \ <5rv.  By  the  word  spirit  he  means  sugges- 
tion, inspiration,  impulse,  teaching,  or  rather  the  person  himself 
who  suggests,  inspires,  teaches,  &c.  He  means,  do  not  give  credit 
to  everything  which  every  teacher  or  adviser  teaches  and  advises 
you.  For  there  are  diverse,  yea  contrary  teachers,  who  are  influenced 
by  contrary  spirits.  Wise  and  orthodox  teachers  are  moved  by  the 
good  Spirit  of  God,  wicked  and  erring  teachers,  such  as  heretics,  by 
the  evil  spirit  of  the  devil  And  so,  as  Dionysius  says,  the  good, 
or  evil  spirit,  speaks  by  the  mouth  of  doctors.  Thus  the  devil, 
speaking  by  the  mouth  of  the  serpent,  tempted  and  seduced  Eve. 
There  is  a reference  to  sailors,  who  do  not  trust  every  spirit,  or 
breath,  or  blast  of  wind,  for  if  they  did,  they  would  miss  their  destined 
port,  and  would  be  often  driven  upon  rocks  and  quicksands.  Where- 
fore he  bids  us  examine  and  search  out  by  what  spirit  teachers  are  led 
before  we  give  them  our  confidence.  This  is  the  forewarning  which 
Paul  gives  1 Tim.  iv.  1.  “ The  Spirit  speaketh  expressly,”  &c. 

But  try  ye  (as  gold  is  tried  by  the  Lydian  stone),  Syriac,  discern 
ve  between : because,  as  saith  Ambrosiaster,  “ unclean  spirits  are  wont 
by  imitation  to  say  good  things  deceitfully,  and  so  to  superinduce 
evil  things,  that  by  means  of  the  things  which  are  good  the  evil 
things  may  be  accepted,  so  that  they  should  be  supposed  to  be  the 
words  of  one  and  the  same  spirit,  and  that  they  should  not  be  dis- 
cerned the  one  from  the  other,  but  that  which  is  unlawful  should  be 
commended  by  that  which  is  lawful” 

Moreover,  that  Lydian  stone  by  which  spirits  and  doctrines  are  to 
be  tried  is  not  every  one’s  own  private  spirit.  For  this  may  be,  and 
often  is,  moved  by  the  devil,  as  when  one  is  contrary  to  another : 
(for  from  this  have  been  generated  as  many  sects  conflicting  with 
themselves,  as  the  poets  have  feigned  heads  to  Cerberus  *) ; btft  it 

# Qu.  The  Lernsean  Hydra  ? 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


436  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  IV. 


must  be  the  doctrines  of  the  Apostles  and  the  Church.  For  this 
is  the  certain  and  common  heritage  of  all  the  faithful.  Such  was 
that  teaching  which  S.  John  suggests  as  suitable  and  necessary  for 
his  own  age,  saying,  “ Every  spirit  which  confesseth  that  Jesus  Christ 
is  come  in  the  flesh  is  of  God.”  Falsely  therefore  do  the  heretics 
argue  from  this  passage  that  their  heresies  ought  to  be  tried  and 
examined.  For  they  have  been  examined  and  condemned  by  the 
Church.  So  there  is  no  need,  nor  indeed  is  it  right  for  each  private 
Christian  to  try  them.  Thus  S.  Jerome  says  to  Pammachium, 
“ Why  after  4000  years  dost  thou  strive  to  teach  what  we  have  not 
known  before  ? Has  the  Christian  world  been  without  this  doctrine 
until  to-day?”  And  S.  Augustine  says  ( contra  Crcsccn . lib,  2,  c,  35), 
“The  Church,  ye  say,  hath  perished,  and  ye  show  of  whom  ye  are 
sprung.”  And  Vincent  of  Lerius  says,  “ If  novelty  is  to  be  shunned, 
antiquity  is  to  be  held  fast : if  novelty  is  profane,  antiquity  is 
sacred.”  And  Primasius  says  acutely,  “ The  spirits  have  been  already 
tried  by  the  Church.  Why  dost  thou  wish  to  prove  that  which 
hath  been  already  disproved  ? ” 

Moraliter ; S.  John  here  teaches  that  no  Christian  ought  to  trust  all 
his  inward  motions,  impulses,  inspirations,  desires,  reasons  seemingly 
good,  but  ought  carefully  to  examine  their  origin  and  their  author. 
Thus  a man  of  a melancholy  temperament  perceives  motions  and 
impulses  to  sadness,  pusillanimity,  suspicion.  Let  him  not  give 
way  to  them.  For  if  he  examine  their  origin,  he  will  find  that  they 
arise  from  the  evil  spirit  of  melancholy,  which  is  false  and  deceitful 
The  choleric  man  is  agitated  by  blasts  of  anger,  revenge,  indigna- 
tion. He  thinks  he  is  moved  by  a zeal  for  justice.  But  let  him 
with  a calm  mind  and  reason  search  into  their  origin,  and  he  will 
find  they  spring  from  the  evil  spirit  of  bile  and  anger.  Thus  when 
the  Samaritans  would  not  receive  Christ,  and  James  and  John  said, 
“ Lord,  wilt  thou  that  we  call  down  fire  from  heaven  to  consume 
them?”  He  answered,  “Ye  know  not  what  spirit  ye  are  of.”  For 
ye  think  ye  are  moved  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  ye  are  acted  upon 
by  the  human  spirit  of  impatience.  Thus  many  think  they  are  led 
by  the  Spirit  of  God,  that  is  to  say  by  the  Spirit  of  truth,  sobriety, 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


CHRIST’S  INCARNATION. 


437 


chastity,  charity ; whereas,  if  they  would  thoroughly  and  sincerely, 
as  in  the  presence  of  God,  examine  the  ground  of  their  heart,  they 
would  find  that  they  are  led  by  the  spirit  of  the  devil,  that  is  to 
say,  of  vanity,  gluttony,  lust,  &c.  Wherefore  in  those  blasts,  passions, 
and  tumults  of  the  mind,  the  judgment  ought  to  be  suspended. 
And  most  especially  ought  the  Holy  Spirit  to  be  invoked,  that 
He  would  bestow  upon  us  the  gift  of  discernment  of  spirits. 

In  this  is  known  the  Spirit  of  God,  He  means,  This  is  the 
pledge  of  the  true  faith  and  doctrine,  which  the  Spirit  of  God 
teaches  and  suggests,  that  is  to  say,  every  spirit  which  confesseth 
that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh  is  of  God.  This  therefore 
was  in  the  time  of  S.  John  as  it  were  the  pledge  and  the  symbol  of 
the  true  Christian  faith,  namely,  to  believe  and  confess  the  Incarna- 
tion of  Christ  the  Son  of  God,  and  the  rest  of  the  Dispensation  in 
the  flesh.  For  all  the  heretics  and  heresies  at  that  time  fought 
against  this  article  of  the  faith  as  something  new  and  strange. 
Some  denied  Christ’s  Divinity,  and  taught  that  He  was  a mere 
man,  as  Cerinthus  and  others  denied  Christ's  humanity,  and  said  that 
it  was  not  real,  but  a phantasm.  Such  were  Simon  Magus,  Manes, 
and  many  others. 

S.  Augustine  adds  that  all  heresies  reject  Christ  Incarnate, 
because  they  oppose  His  doctrine,  Church,  Sacraments,  Pontiff, 
or  priestly  order,  which  He  established.  Thus  Pelagius,  in  deny- 
ing the  grace  of  Christ,  although  with  his  lips  he  confessed  His 
Incarnation,  in  reality  overthrew  it,  because  the  Incarnation  of 
Christ  took  place  for  the  very  purpose  of  giving  us  grace.  You 
may  say  the  same  of  Luther,  Calvin,  and  the  rest  of  the  sectaries. 
For  which  cause  S.  John  calls  all  heresiarchs  antichrists,  because 
they  are  all  opposed  to  Christ’s  doctrine  and  His  Church. 

Mystically : CEcumenius  understands  this  confession  of  the  coming 
of  Christ  in  the  flesh  “to  be  made  not  with  the  tongue,  but  by 
works.”  For  not  many  heretics  only,  but  bad  Catholics  also,  con- 
fess Christ  in  words,  but  deny  Him  by  their  deeds.  It  means,  he 
who  confesses  Christ,  both  by  living  rightly,  as  well  as  by  believing 
truly  concerning  Him,  this  man  is  of  God.  So  Bede.  As  S.  Augustine 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


438  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  IV. 


says,  “Let  us  confess  that  Christ  has  come  in  the  flesh,  both  by 
speaking  the  truth  in  words,  and  by  living  well  in  deeds.  For  if  we 
confess  in  words,  and  deny  by  deeds,  the  faith  of  such  is  very  nigh 
the  faith  of  devils.” 

Ver.  3. — And  every  spirit  which  dissolves  (solvit)  Jesus,  is  not  of 
God (Vulg.)  It  means  that  Jesus  is  composed  of  the  Godhead 
and  the  manhood  by  the  bond  of  the  hypostatic  union.  He  there- 
fore who  loosens  this  bond,  by  denying  that  Christ  is  God,  as  do 
the  Arians,  or  that  He  is  man,  as  other  heretics,  is  not  of  God,  but 
of  the  devil.  For  such  deny  that  Christ  the  Son  of  God  came  from 
heaven  in  the  flesh,  and  say  that  He  is  God  only  or  man  only.  This 
is  what  is  set  forth  to  be  believed  in  the  Athanasian  symbol  concern- 
ing Christ.  “ For  as  the  reasonable  soul  and  flesh  is  one  man,  so 
God  and  man  are  one  Christ ; ” where  observe  that  the  word  as  signifies 
union  and  unity,  not  the  same  but  similar.  For  the  rational  soul 
and  flesh  make  our  composite  being,  our  man.  But  the  Godhead 
and  the  manhood  united  in  Christ  make  one  composite  Being,  not 
essentially,  but  substantially,  or  hypostatically.  Nor  indeed  does 
the  Godhead  inform  the  Humanity  in  the  same  way  that  the  soul 
informs  the  body,  but  subsists  whole  and  immingled.  It  unites  the 
Manhood  to  Itself  in  the  same  hypostasis  of  the  Word.  Where- 
fore Nestorius  truly  dissolves  Christ,  teaching  that  in  Him  are  two 
Persons,  as  there  are  two  Natures,  and  that  therefore  in  Christ  the 
man  is  diverse  and  distinct  from  God.  Christ  therefore  as  God  in 
the  Humanity  is  as  the  pearl  in  the  shell,  conceived  and  formed  of 
virgin  matter,  and  the  dew  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  most  fair  by  the 
innocency  of  His  life,  most  bright  by  the  light  of  His  wisdom, 
rounded  by  the  possession  of  all  perfection,  having  the  weight  of 
constancy,  the  polish  of  meekness,  the  price  of  blessedness.  So 
Salmeron. 

Observe:  the  Greek  and  Syriac  read  here,  Every  spirit  which 
confesseth  not  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh  is  not  of  God \ So 
also  reads  S.  Cyprian  (/.  2 contr.  Jud.),  Tertullian  (lib.  de  Came 
Christ,  c.  24),  though  they,  instead  of  does  not  confess , read  who  denies. 
But  the  rest  of  the  Latin  Fathers  have  generally  which  dissolves , as 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


ANTICHRIST. 


439 


above.  So  S.  Leo  (Epist.  io  c.  5),  Tertullian  also  (lib,  contr.  Psych, 
c.  1),  and  Irenaeus  (lib.  3 c,  18),  and  S.  Augustine  on  this  passage, 
who  also  brings  forward  and  explains  the  other  reading.  Moreover, 
in  the  Greek,  instead  of  o/xo\oy T/,  i.e.  confess, , it  was  formerly  read 
a’vaXui/,  i.e.  dissolves.  This  we  learn  from  Didymus  and  S.  Cyril 
(de  Fide  ad  Regin,).  And  from  him  Socrates  writes  (/.  7 c,  32), 
speaking  of  Nestorius,  who  denied  that  the  Blessed  Virgin  was  the 
Mother  of  God,  as  follows : “ He  was  ignorant  that  in  ancient  copies 
of  the  Catholic  Epistle  of  John,  it  is  written,  1 Every  spirit  which  dis- 
solves Jesus  is  not  of  God/  For  those  who  wished  to  separate  the 
Godhead  from  the  dispensation  of  the  Manhood  took  away  this 
sentence  out  of  the  ancient  codices.” 

Allegorically:  he  dissolves  Christ,  who  by  schism  rends  the  Church, 
which  is  the  Body  of  Christ.  “ Christ,”  says  S.  Augustine,  “ came  to 
gather  together : thou  comest  to  dissolve.  How  dost  thou  not  deny 
that  He  came  in  the  flesh,  when  thou  breakest  in  pieces  the  Church 
which  He  gathered  together  ? ” 

And  this  is  Antichrist:  The  Greek  reads,  And  this  is  of  Anti- 
christ; the  Syriac,  This  is  from  the  false  Christ  himself.  And  S. 
Cyprian  reads  (contr.  fud.  lib.  2 c.  7 vol.  8),  He  who  denies  that  He 
is  come  in  the  flesh  is  not  of  God \ but  is  of  the  spirit  of  Antichrist. 
In  a similar  manner,  John  the  Baptist  is  called  Elias,  not  in  person, 
but  in  office  and  spirit. 

Because  he  comes  (Vulg.),  i.e.  will  surely  come. 

And  now  already  he  is  in  the  worlds  not  in  person,  but  in  spirit ; 
that  is  to  say,  in  his  forerunners.  This  is  what  Paul  says,  “The 
mystery  of  iniquity  doth  already  work.”  (2  Thess.  ii.  7.)  Thus 
Luther  paved  the  way  for  Mahometanism,  and  consequently  for 
Antichrist,  by  teaching,  amongst  other  things,  that  the  Turk  ought 
not  to  be  resisted.  This  he  attempted  to  prove  by  the  following 
sophistical  argument — We  must  not  resist  the  scourge  of  God,  for 
that  is  the  same  thing  as  resisting  God  scourging  us.  But  the  Turk 
is  the  scourge  of  God.  Therefore  the  Turk  ought  not  to  be  resisted. 
The  same  argument  would  prove  that  thieves  and  robbers  ought 
not  to  be  resisted,  for  they  are  all  a scourge  pf  Qod.  Bqt  there  are 


Digitized  by 


Google 


440  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  IV. 

scourges  that  ought  to  be  scourged  by  the  magistrates,  for  they  are 
not  by  the  direct,  but  the  permissive  will  of  God.  And  what  other 
effect  would  such  an  argument  have  but  to  subject  all  Christians  to 
the  Turks,  and  make  them  Turks?  Wherefore  when  the  Turkish 
Sultan  Solyman  asked  the  imperial  ambassador  how  old  Luther  was, 
and  received  in  reply  that  he  was  forty-eight,  he  said  he  was  sorry 
that  on  account  of  his  impending  old  age  he  would  not  be  able  to 
assist  him  as  much  in  the  time  to  come  as  he  had  done.  Luther 
makes  a boast  of  this  Solyman’s  good  opinion  of  him  (lib.  Symposia c), 
and  glories  in  his  entire  good-will  towards  him. 

Ver.  4. — Ye  are  of  God \ little  children , and  have  overcome  him. 
Because  ye,  O Christians,  are  of  God,  who  is  the  prime  and  eternal 
Truth,  therefore  ye  have  overcome  him ; namely,  the  spirit  of  Anti- 
christ, the  spirit  of  error  and  heresy.  Hence  the  Greek  and  Syriac 
read  them , Le.  ye  have  overcome  the  false  prophets,  and  spirits  of 
error.  S.  Cyprian  (lib.  de  Simp.  Prelat.)  reads,  »/xars,  i.e.  over- 
come them>  as  a voice  exhorting  to  battle  and  victory.  The  present 
Greek  text  has  mixqxara,  ye  have  overcome  them , the  voice  of 
congratulation  on  account  of  victory. 

For  greater  is  He  that  is  in  you , &c.  He  gives  the  reason  of 
victory,  namely  Christ  and  His  Spirit  of  truth,  which  rules  the 
faithful,  and  who  is  greater  than  the  devil,  and  his  spirit  of  error, 
who  rules  over  the  world,  i.e.  worldly  men,  heretics  and  impious 
persons.  He  says  this  to  impress  humility  upon  the  faithful,  that 
they  should  ascribe  their  victory,  not  to  their  own  strength,  but  to 
the  grace  of  God. 

The  same  principle  may  be  extended  to  every  temptation. 
Wherefore  S.  John  says  (Apoc.  xii.  n),  “They  overcame  him  by  the 
Blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  the  word  of  their  testimony.”  And  the 
Church  sings  in  her  hymn  for  martyrs,  “Thou  conquerest  in  the 
martyrs.” 

3.  S.  Ambrose  (Horn.  1 de  Elisceo ) extends  the  same  principle 
to  hostile  armies:  “I  remember  that  I have  often  said  that  we 
ought  by  no  means  to  fear  the  warlike  assaults  of  enemies,  nor 
dread  their  numbers,  however  vast.  For,  as  the  Apostle  says 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  ARMS  OF  CHRIST. 


441 


“ greater  is  He  that  is  in  us  than  he  that  is  in  the  world.”  Christ  is 
more  powerful  to  protect  His  servants  than  the  devil  is  to  urge  their 
enemies  on.  For  although  the  devil  collects  his  multitudes,  and 
arms  them  with  cruel  rage,  yet  are  they  soon  destroyed,  because  the 
Saviour  encompasses  His  people  with  better  defenders.  For  the 
prophet  says,  “The  Lord  shall  send  His  angel  round  about  them 
that  fear  Him,  and  deliver  them.”  But  if  the  angel  of  the  Lord 
rescues  them  that  fear  Him  out  of  dangers,  they  who  fear  the  Saviour 
cannot  fear  barbarians.  Neither  can  he  who  keeps  the  precepts 
of  Christ  fear  the  attack  of  an  enemy.”  He  gives  the  reason,  the 
arms  of  Christ.  “The  commands  of  Christ  are  the  arms  of 
Christians.  And  the  fear  of  God  drives  out  the  enemies*  fear. 
Our  arms  are  those  with  which  the  Saviour  has  provided  us,  prayer, 
mercy,  and  fasting.  Fasting  is  a better  defence  than  a wall. 
Mercy  more  easily  delivers  than  rapiers.  Prayer  hath  a longer 
flight  than  an  arrow.”  Then  he  confirms  what  he  says  by  the 
example  of  Elisseus  when  he  was  encompassed  by  the  hosts  of 
Syrians.  He  said  to  his  trembling  servant,  “ Fear  not,  for  more  are 
they  that  are  with  us,  than  they  that  are  with  them.” 

4.  S.  Prosper  {lib.  1 de  Vocat  Gent.)  extends  it  to  the  daily 
temptations  of  the  faithful.  He  shows,  in  opposition  to  Pelagius, 
that  there  is  need  of  the  grace  of  God  to  overcome  them.  “ The 
victory  of  the  saints,”  he  says,  “ is  the  work  of  God  dwelling  in  the 
saints.” 

5.  Some  extend  it  to  every  arduous  work,  so  that  each  Christian 
should  animate  himself  by  saying  to  himself,  “ Greater  is  He  that 
is  in  me  than  he  that  is  in  the  world.”  And  with  S.  Paul,  “I  can 
do  all  things  through  Him  who  strengtheneth  me.”  And  with  S. 
Cyprian,  “ He  who  is  greater  than  the  world  cannot  desire  anything 
of  the  world  ” (lib.  2,  ep.  2).  And  he  adds,  “ He  becomes  greater 
and  stronger  in  might,  so  that  with  imperial  authority  he  rises 
superior  to  all  the  hosts  which  attack  him.”  “ Let  us  despise  there- 
fore everything  under  heaven  as  vain  and  deceitful,  and  unworthy 
of  our  love.”  And  with  S.  Hilary,  “ Let  us  be  lowly  in  heart,  but 
lofty  in  mind,”  for  we  bear  upon  our  head  the  strength  and  omni* 


Digitized  by  CnOOQle 


442  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  IV. 


s. 1 


potence  of  Christ.  I once  saw  in  Belgium  a colonel  who  said  to 
the  heretics  who  were  menacing  him,  “ I fear  none  of  you,  for  I 
bear  the  crown  of  Spain  upon  my  head.”  So  let  the  Christian  say, 
“ I bear  upon  my  head,  not  the  crown  of  Spain,  but  the  crown  of 
God.  Therefore  I fear  not  all  the  power  of  men  and  devils ; no,  not 
all  the  might  of  hell.  I challenge  them  all  to  battle.”  Thus  did 
S.  Athanasius  challenge  all  the  Arians  and  the  whole  world.  For 
“if  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us?”  What  great  things  by 
the  power  of  God  did  S.  Paul,  S.  Antony,  S.  Simeon  Stylites,  S. 
Francis,  and  all  the  virgins,  heroes,  and  martyrs ! We  can  do  like- 
wise through  the  same  God  “who  triumphs,”  i.e.  “who  makes  us 
to  triumph  in  Christ.”  (2  Cor.  ii.  14).  And  God  Himself  has  made 
us  this  promise  (Isa.  lviii.  24),  saying,  “ I will  lift  thee  up  above  the 
high  places  of  the  earth,”  so  that  like  an  eagle  dwelling  in  heaven 
thou  mayest  there  despise  whatsoever  is  in  the  world.  This  Seneca 
saw  as  in  a shadow,  when  he  said,  “We  must  seek  for  that  which 
does  not  become  more  worthless  day  by  day.  And  what  is  that  ? 
It  is  the  mind.  But  this  must  be  a mind  right,  and  good,  and 
great.  And  what  else  can  you  call  this  but  God  dwelling  as  a guest 
in  a human  body?”  ( Epist . 54*) 

5.  They  are  of  the  worlds  &e.  For  heretics  are  not  of  God  but 
of  the  world,  because  they  love  the  riches,  honours,  and  pleasures 
of  the  world.  Whence  worldly  people,  who  care  only  for  what  is  of 
the  world,  gladly  hear  them.  “A  heretic,”  says  S.  Augustine  ( de 
util,  credendi ),  “ is  he  who  for  the  sake  of  some  temporal  advantage, 
but  especially  of  glory,  and  the  pre-eminence  which  it  gives,  either 
brings  forth  or  follows  new  and  false  opinions.”  “All  heretics,” 
says  Tertullian,  “are  puffed  up,  all  make  profession  of  science.” 
“What  heretic,”  says  S.  Jerome,  “does  not  swell  with  pride?” 
And  again,  S.  Augustine  says,  “One  mother,  pride,  hath  brought 
forth  all  heresies,  even  as  our  own  mother,  the  Catholic  Church,  all 
faithful  Christians  dispersed  throughout  the  world.” 

Ver.  6. — We  are  of  God:  he  that  knoweth  God  heareth  us,  &c. 
Even  as  Christ  saith,  “ He  that  heareth  you,  heareth  Me : he  that 
despiseth  you,  despiseth  Me.”  We,  i.e . all  the  faithful,  who  have 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


CHARITY. 


443 


been  born  again  in  baptism,  and  are  endued  with  charity.  We,  viz. 
the  predestinated.  3d.  And  last:  We,  i.e.  the  Apostles.  For,  as 
CEcumenius  says  to  heresiarchs,  who,  he  said,  spoke  of  the  world, 
and  from  the  world — i.e,  who  teach  worldly  and  carnal  cupidity — to 
them  he  opposes  the  Apostles,  who  being  born  of  God,  and  imbued 
with  heavenly  doctrine,  and  being  sent  by  God,  teach  men  to  covet 
things  spiritual,  divine,  and  heavenly.  Wherefore  he  who  practically 
knows  God,  i.e,  he  who  loves  Him,  heareth  us,  i.e,  me  John,  and 
the  rest  of  the  Apostles,  and  Apostolic  men.  But  he  who  does  not 
love  God,  and  therefore  is  not  of  God,  but  of  the  world,  this  man 
heareth  not  us.  Wherefore  he  adds,  By  this  we  know  the  spirit  of 
truth,  and  the  spirit  of  error ; by  this,  namely,  “because  he  that 
heareth  us  hath  the  spirit  of  truth,  he  that  heareth  not  us  hath  the 
spirit  of  error,”  as  S.  Augustine  saith.  For  heretics,  who  are  led  by 
the  spirit  of  error,  teach  the  things  of  the  world : but  the  Apostles 
and  Apostolic  Doctors,  who  are  born  of  God,  teach  things 
Divine. 

Ver.  7 .—Dearly  beloved,  let  us  love  one  another.  These  words  are 
rightly  connected  with  what  preceded.  He  means  that  the  spirit  of 
error  is  the  spirit  of  cupidity,  but  the  Spirit  of  truth  is  the  Spirit  of 
love  and  charity.  Erroneous  and  heretical  doctrine  teaches  men  to 
love  honours,  wealth,  gluttony ; but  the  Apostles  teach  us  to  love 
God  and  our  neighbour.  He  subjoins  the  reason  : 

For  love  is  of  God.  The  Spirit  of  truth  is  the  Spirit  of  charity, 
that  we  may  love  one  another ; because  as  truth  is  from  God,  so  also 
is  charity.  Yea,  God,  who  is  the  chief  and  eternal  Truth,  is  also  the 
highest  and  uncreated  Love.  Wherefore  it  follows  as  a necessary 
consequence,  that  any  one  who  loveth  (not  by  natural,  but  by  super- 
natural charity)  is  bom  of  God.  Being  born  again  of  faith  and 
charity,  which  are  from  God,  he  is  made  a child  of  God.  For 
charity  is  a supernatural  faculty,  giving  to  the  soul  the  ability  to 
love  God  and  our  neighbour.  That  he  may  know  God,  not  merely 
theoretically,  but  practically,  because  he  supremely  loves  God  whom 
he  knows  to  be  the  Highest  Good.  Again,  love  causes  a man  more 
fully  to  know,  and  to  have  taste  and  experience  of  God,  as  it  were 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


\- 


444  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  IV. 

by  spiritual  taste.  And  this  taste  and  experience  grow  continually, 
even  as  love  increases.  Especially  is  this  so,  because  God  manifests 
Himself  to  him  who  loves,  and  more  clearly  reveals  Himself  to  him 
by  interior  illuminations,  inspirations,  and  consolations,  according  to 
that  promise  of  Christ,  “ He  that  loveth  Me  shall  be  loved  of  My 
Father : and  I will  love  him,  and  will  manifest  Myself  unto  him.” 
(Jno.  xiv.  21). 

Observe : Love  is  of  God \ — ist.  Because  the  essential,  uncreated 
charity  flows  naturally  from  the  Divine  Essence  Itself,  like  heat 
from  fire.  Indeed,  the  Divine  Essence  Itself  is  Love. 

2d.  Because  the  Holy  Spirit  is  Itself  substantial  or  essential 
( notionalis ) Love.  For  He,  as  essential  Love,  proceeds  from  the 
Father  and  the  Son  by  that  act  of  love  by  which  they  love  one 
another  with  an  infinite  love. 

3d.  Charity  was  created  by  God,  because  it  is  the  highest  and 
noblest  gift  of  God,  according  to  the  words  (Rom.  v.  5),  “The 
love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts ; ” not  as  if  the  charity 
wherewith  we  love  God  were  itself  God,  or  the  Holy  Spirit.  For 
this  is  an  exploded  error.  But  because  God,  who  is  uncreated 
Love,  inspires  and  kindles  in  us  that  created  charity  with  which 
we  love  Him.  As  the  light  illuminating  produces  the  light  illumi- 
nated, as  S.  Augustine  says  ( Confess . 12.  15).  And  this  is  precisely 
S.  John's  meaning  in  this  place,  in  which  he  tacitly  intimates  that 
this  gift  is  not  to  be  ascribed  to  our  own  strength,  but  is  to  be 
asked  of  God  by  constant  prayer. 

4th.  Charity  is  of  God,  because  God  first  loved  us  (Jno.  iv.  19), 
and  by  loving  us  inflames  us  to  love  Him  in  return. 

5th.  Charity  is  of  God,  because  it  is  sanctioned  by  the  law  ot 
God,  and  frequently  and  especially  commended  by  it.  For  the 
whole  Decalogue  is  nothing  else  but  the  law  of  love  to  God  and 
our  neighbour. 

From  hence  it  follows  that  God  is  in  Himself  formal  charity, 
and  in  us  causal  charity,  and  that  as  respecting  every  kind  of  cause : 
material , because  He  Himself  is  the  object  of  our  love ; formal \ 
because  He  is  the  pattern  of  the  same ; efficient , because  He  pro- 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


LOVE  KNOWN  BY  LOVING.  445 

duces  it  in  us ; He  is  the  final  cause , because  He  is  our  end,  and 
the  end  of  our  love. 

Lastly,  natural  love  is  from  nature,  carnal  love  from  the  flesh, 
worldly  love  from  the  world ; but  supernatural  love,  or  charity,  is 
from  God  alone. 

Ver.  8. — He  that  loveth  not  knoweth  not  God.  S.  John  having 
said  just  above,  Every  one  that  loveth  is  bom  of  Godi  now  proves 
the  same  thing  from  the  contrary.  He  means,  he  who  loveth  not 
God  and  his  neighbour,  although  he  may  know  God  speculatively, 
does  not  know  Him  practically,  that  is,  experimentally.  Just  as  no 
one  knows  experimentally  the  savour  and  sweetness  of  honey  unless  he 
taste  it.  For  as  taste  is  known  by  tasting,  so  is  love  known  and  tasted 
by  actually  loving.  Wherefore,  although  S.  John  might  in  a similar 
manner  have  said,  He  who  is  not  wise  doth  not  know  God,  because 
God  is  Wisdom  ; or  he  who  is  not  patient,  knows  not  God,  because 
God  is  Patience  ; or  he  who  is  not  humble,  knows  not  Christ,  because 
Christ  is  Humility,  and  so  on — nevertheless,  preferred  to  say,  He 
that  loveth  not,  knoweth  not  God,  because  God  is  Love.  This 
was  (i.)  Because  he  is  treating  of  charity,  not  of  wisdom,  patience, 
&c.  (2.)  Because  being  full  of  the  love  of  God  and  Christ,  he 

breathes  and  delights  in  nothing  else.  For,  as  S.  Bernard  says, 
“Between  the  bridegroom  and  the  bride,  i.e.  between  lovers,  no 
union  need  be  sought  but  to  love  and  be  loved,  for  that  Spouse  is 
not  only  loving,  but  Love  Itself.”  This  is  what  Jeremiah  says 
(xxxi.  3),  “ I have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love,  therefore  with 
loving-kindness  have  I drawn  thee.” 

For  God  is  love;  both  formal  and  uncreate,  and  so  essential,  and 
also  causal  and  created.  For  in  God  and  the  Divine  Essence,  on 
account  of  Its  perfection  and  simplicity,  there  are  no  accidents,  but 
those  things  which  in  us  are  accidents,  are  in  God  inseparable  from 
His  Essence.  Wisdom,  goodness,  love,  and  power  are  themselves 
the  Divine  Essence.  So  the  Council  of  Rheims  defined  against 
Gilbert  Moreover,  God  is  charity,  or  love,  both  in  the  abstract 
and  the  concrete.  For  He  is  supreme  affection,  and  loves  supremely, 
and  therefore  ought  to  be  supremely  loved  by  us  in  return.  Godf 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


446  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  IV. 


then,  is  Love,  because  He  hath  supremely  loved  us.  And  He  hath 
given  us  this  most  clear  proof  of  His  love  in  that  He  sent  His  only 
Begotten  Son  to  save  us.  Hence  S.  Augustine  and  Bede  teach  that 
he  who  loves  not  his  neighbour  sins  against  God,  because  God 
is  Love. 

Again,  S.  Chrysostom  teaches  that  nothing  can  be  compared  with 
charity,  because  God  Himself,  who  is  incomparable,  is  Charity. 
Gagneius  declares  that  we  are  certain  that  God  loves  us  with  an 
infinite  love  because  He  is  very  Love  Itself.  Hence  the  Fathers 
infer  that  Charity  commands  and  embraces  all  the  other  virtues,  for 
God  commands  and  includes  them. 

Ver.  9. — In  this  love  appeared:  He  now  declares  why  he  said, 
God  is  Lave . It  is  because  God  hath  declared  His  infinite  love 
towards  us  by  sending  Christ  in  the  flesh  for  our  salvation,  that  by 
this  means  He  might  invite  us  to  love  Him  back.  There  is  an 
allusion  to  the  words  in  S.  John’s  Gospel  (iii.  19),  “So  God  loved 
the  world  that  He  gave  His  Only  Begotten  Son,  that  whosoever 
believeth  in  Him  should  not  perish,  but  have  eternal  life.” 

“ Behold,”  says  S.  Augustine,  " how  we  have  an  exhortation  to 
love  God.  How  could  we  love  Him  unless  He  had  first  loved  us  ? 
If  we  were  slow  to  love,  let  us  not  be  slow  to  love  again.” 
Pathetically  and  learnedly  does  S.  Paulinus  write  about  S.  Mary 
Magdalene  {Epist.  4 ad  Sever.):  “Therefore,  let  us  love  Him 
whom  it  is  our  duty  to  love.  Let  us  kiss  Him  whom  to  kiss  is 
purity.  Let  us  be  joined  to  Him  whose  marriage-bond  is  virginity. 
Let  us  be  subject  to  Him,  at  whose  feet  to  lie  is  to  stand  above 
the  world.  Let  us  fall  down  because  of  Him  for  whom  to  fall  is 
resurrection.  Let  us  die  for  Him  in  whom  is  life.  In  whom  we 
live  though  we  are  dead.” 

In  this , i.e.  in  the  love  of  God  wherewith  lie  loved  us.  S.  John, 
the  beloved  of  Christ,  lays  special  stress  upon  this,  that  God,  moved 
by  no  love,  or  duty  on  our  part,  but  offended  by  our  many 
provocations  and  wickednesses,  first  loved  us.  And  when  we  were 
sinners  and  enemies,  fleeing  from  Him,  and  fighting  against  Him, 
He  followed  us,  and  turned  us  by  His  love,  that  He  might  bring  us 


Digitized  by 


Google 


DIVINE  LOVE. 


447 


back  and  save  us.  “ For  to  this  end  He  loved  us,”  says  S. 
Augustine,  “ that  we  might  love  Him.”  And  therefore  He  sent  His 
Son  to  he  a propitiation , Le.  to  be  a propitiator,  and  a propitiatory 
victim  for  our  sins.  S.  Augustine  reads  libatorem , a pourer  of 
libations , and  explains  it  to  mean  Sacrifices  As  S.  Augustine  says 
again,  “ He  loved  the  wicked,  that  He  might  make  them  holy.  He 
loved  the  unjust,  that  He  might  make  them  just  He  loved  the 
sick,  that  He  might  make  them  whole.” 

See  in  this  how  high  the  ways  of  God  are  above  the  ways  of 
men.  For  with  men,  if  any  one  despise  them,  vex  or  spoil  them, 
straightway  they  hate  him,  and  think  how  they  may  do  him  some 
greater  injury.  But  God — despised,  contemned,  robbed  of  His 
honour,  injured  in  a thousand  ways — enlarges  the  bowels  of  His 
love  towards  us.  With  love  He  fights  against  man's  hate.  By 
hatred  He  is  stirred  up  to  love.  Hatred  is  the  whip  of  His  love. 
He  overcomes  hatred  by  His  infinite  love,  swallows  it  up,  drowns 
and  extinguishes  it,  as  a mighty  conflagration  extinguishes  a little 
drop  of  water.  The  love  of  God  therefore  towards  His  enemies 
is  so  wonderful,  that  by  it  He  makes  them  His  friends,  His  sons 
and  heirs,  and  turns  the  greatest  sinners  into  the  greatest  saints. 
Out  of  the  thief  upon  the  cross  He  made  a preacher  of  Him- 
self. Out  of  Saul  He  made  S.  Paul.  Out  of  the  sinful  Magdalene 
He  made  a mirror  of  penitence  and  holiness.  This  is  what  Paul 
celebrates  and  admires  (i  Tim.  i.  15),  “This  is  a faithful 
saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into 
the  world  to  save  sinners,  of  whom  I am  chief ; but  therefore  I 
obtained  mercy,  that  in  me  first  Christ  Jesus  might  shew  all 
patience,  for  the  instruction  of  those  who  should  hereafter  believe 
in  Him  unto  eternal  life.” 

Ver.  11. — Dearly  beloved , if  God  so  loved  us , &c.  If  here  is  not 
a particle  expressive  of  doubtfulness.  It  is  not  conditional,  but 
causal,  and  is  equivalent  to  because . It  means,  Because  God  so 
loves  us.  Christ  uses  a similar  construction,  when  He  says,  “If 
I,  your  Lord  and  Master,  have  washed  your  feet,  ye  also  ought 
to  wash  one  another's  feet” 


Digitized  by 


Google 


448  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  IV. 

S.  John  says  if \ rather  than  because , for  the  sake  of  greater 
weight  and  pathos,  as  it  were  lost  in  amazement  at  the  infinite 
love  of  God.  Wherefore  it  is  advisedly  and  intentionally  that  he 
says  after  the  antecedent,  if  God  so  loved  us,  not  we  therefore  ought 
so  to  love  God \ which  is  impossible,  but,  we  ought  also  to  love  one 
another.  As  much  as  to  say,  Since  we  cannot  render  equal  love 
in  return  for  Divine  love,  let  us  at  least  love  one  another  accord- 
ing to  our  slender  capacity.  For  what  we  do  to  our  neighbour 
God  accounts  as  done  to  Him. 

The  word  us  includes  also  our  neighbours.  If  God,  who  is  not 
a partaker,  vouchsafes  to  love  all  who  participate  in  our  nature, 
how  much  more  does  it  become  us  to  embrace  with  our  love  all 
who  are  of  the  same  nature,  and  in  respect  of  it  are  equals?  Truly 
does  S.  Augustine  say  on  this  passage  {Tract.  7):  “Love,  and 
do  what  thou  wilt.  For  if  thou  art  silent,  thou  keepest  silence 
through  love.  If  thou  criest  out,  thou  criest  out  in  love.  If  thou 
correctest,  thou  correctest  lovingly.  If  thou  sparest,  thou  sparest  in 
love.  Let  this  be  the  root  of  love  within.  From  that  root  nothing 
but  love  can  spring.” 

Ver.  12. — No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time.  Why  does  S.  John 
here  introduce  these  words  ? It  is  because  these  words  partly  give 
the  reason  why  from  the  antecedent,  if  God  so  loved  us  the  inference 
is  drawn  we  also  ought  to  love  one  another , not  God  (as  might  seem 
to  be  the  conclusion  that  should  be  drawn),  because  we  cannot  see 
God,  and  benefit  Him  by  loving  Him.  Hence,  in  the  place  of  God, 
we  testify  our  love  towards  Him  whom  we  cannot  see  and  do  good 
to,  by  doing  good  to  our  neighbour  whom  we  can  see  and  benefit. 
Partly  the  words  invite  us  to  love  our  neighbour,  and  cohere  with 
what  follows.  As  though  he  said,  Zealously  love  your  neighbour. 
For  this  love  God  reckons  as  given  to  Himself.  For  although  we 
cannot  see  Him,  yet,  if  we  love  our  neighbour,  He,  the  Invisible, 
will  be  most  truly  present  with  us,  and  thus  abiding  in  our  soul,  will 
place  His  seat  and  throne  there.  Yea,  His  love  will  be  fully  im- 
printed and  perfected  in  our  soul.  The  reason  is  because  indi- 
visible and  Divine  charity  conjoins  and  confederates  us  with  the 


Digitized  by  boogie 


GOD  INVISIBLE.  449 

invisible  God.  Moreover,  God,  who  is  invisible  in  Himself,  seems 
visible  in  our  neighbour.  For  he  is  God’s  image. 

Observe,  no  one  hath  seen  God  at  any  time , viz.,  in  His  Essence, 
or  face  to  face,  in  this  life.  Whence  the  Doctors  teach,  with  proba- 
bility, that  neither  Moses,  nor  Paul,  nor  any  other  mere  man  (for 
Christ  saw  God,  but  He  was  the  God-man),  hath  seen  the  Divine 
Essence  in  this  life,  according  to  the  words  in  Exod.  xxxiii. : “ No 
man  shall  see  Me  and  live.”  Yet  S.  Augustine  holds  a contrary 
opinion,  and  from  him  S.  Thomas. 

Again,  no  man  hath  seen  Gody  for  neither  is  he  able  to  see  Him  by 
the  powers  of  his  nature,  as  the  Anomseans  and  Eunomseans  sup- 
posed. Whom  S.  Chrysostom  and  S.  Basil  {lib.  contr.  Eunom.)  refute. 
For  the  Blessed  in  heaven  see  God,  but  by  the  power  of  grace.  For 
their  mind  is  there  elevated,  and  receives  as  it  were  another  eye  of 
a Divine  order,  even  the  light  of  glory,  by  which  it  sees  God.  By 
this  sentence,  then,  S.  John  signifies  that  the  majesty  of  God  is  so 
sublime,  and  so  transcends,  not  only  all  other  created  things,  but  also 
the  intelligence  both  of  men  and  angels,  that  although  He  Himself 
is  the  most  glorious  Light,  yet  on  account  of  His  purity,  subtilty,  and 
sublimity,  He  cannot  be  perceived  by  any  mind,  or  any  created  eye. 
S.  John  says  the  same  thing  in  his  Gospel  (i.  18).  But  there  he 
applies  it  to  the  knowledge  of  God,  as  here  to  the  love  of  God.  It 
is  as  though  he  said,  “ God  is  invisible,  and  therefore  cannot  (in 
Himself)  receive  any  office  of  love  from  man,  because  He  far 
transcends  all  human  wealth,  as  well  as  human  sight  and  action. 
Yet  He  makes  so  much  account  of  love,  and  of  those  who  love  their 
neighbour,  that  He  stoops  to  them  from  the  topmost  height  of  heaven, 
and  as  it  were  comes  down,  dwells  and  abides  in  their  hearts.  This 
is  that  which  S.  Paul  speaks  of  (i  Tim.  vi.  16),  “Who  only  hath 
immortality,  and  dwelleth  in  the  inaccessible  light,  whom  no  man 
hath  seen  or  can  see.” 

Lastly,  S.  Cyril  of  Jerusalem  {Cateches.  9)  thinks  that  God  cannot 
be  seen  with  the  bodily  eyes,  because  He  Himself  is  incorporeal ; 
and  that  therefore  He  stretches  out  the  heaven  itself  as  a veil  before 

our  eyes,  lest  the  brightness  of  the  Godhead  should  blind  us,  or  kill 

VOL.  v.  2 F 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


450  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  IV. 


us.  But  this  is  not  true  unless  it  be  thus  explained,  that  God,  although 
dwelling  Himself  incorporeally  in  the  empyrean,  which  is  corporeal, 
and  manifesting  Himself  and  His  glory  to  the  bodies  of  the  Blessed, 
there  produces  so  great  sensible  light,  which  in  some  way  sets  forth 
His  majesty,  that  it  would  blind  the  eyes  of  the  Blessed,  yea  destroy 
them,  unless  they  were  fortified  and  preserved  by  the  Divine  power. 

Hence  S.  Epiphanius  (in  vii.  Synod.  Actor \ 6)  teaches  that  God 
as  He  is  in  Himself  cannot  be  expressed  by  any  image.  Moreover 
also,  Moses,  forbidding  the  Jews  to  make  an  image  of  God,  gives 
the  reason:  “Ye  heard  the  voice  of  His  words,  but  ye  saw  no 

shape,  &c.  Ye  saw  no  similitude,  lest  being  deceived  ye  should 
make  a graven  image.”  (Deut.  iv.  12.) 

His  love  is  perfected  in  us:  perfected , because  it  is  perfect  and  com- 
plete in  all  its  parts.  Now  the  parts  and  offices  of  charity  are  two- 
fold— 1st  Love  of  God ; 2d.  Love  of  our  neighbour.  Wherefore,  if 
there  were  only  that  part  of  charity  that  we  loved  God,  it  would  be 
imperfect ; but  it  is  perfected  and  completed  if  the  second  be  added, 
and  charity  extends  to  our  neighbour.  Again,  the  charity  with 
which  we  love  God  is  perfected  by  charity  towards  our  neighbour, 
because  we  love  our  neighbour  for  no  other  reason  than  for  God's 
sake.  The  love  therefore  of  our  neighbour  for  God's  sake  perfects 
the  love  of  God,  because  that  which  is  the  reason  why  other  things 
are  loved  is  Itself  much  more  loved.  When  therefore  we  love  our 
neighbour  for  God's  sake,  much  more  do  we  love  God  Himself. 

ad.  The  words  may  be  understood  of  charity — not  ours,  but  God's. 
For  this  is  the  meaning  of  the  word  His : thus — Although  God  be 
invisible,  yet  He  abides  in  us  by  love.  Moreover,  He  shows  that 
He  loves  us  with  a perfect  love,  since  abiding  in  us,  He  forms,  pre- 
serves, and  augments  in  us  the  charity  with  which  we  love,  not  only 
Himself,  but  our  neighbour  for  His  sake.  This  meaning  is  alluded 
to  in  the  next  verse. 

Moreover,  charity  is  chiefly  perfected  by  the  love  of  our  enemies, 
extending  itself  beyond  our  friends  to  our  rivals,  enemies,  and  per- 
secutors. “The  fire  of  charity,"  says  S.  Augustine,  “first  seizes 
upon  our  neighbours,  and  so  extends  itself  further,  from  our  brethren 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


GOD  ABIDES  IN  THE  LOVER  AND  THE  BELOVED.  45 1 

to  strangers,  from  thence  to  our  adversaries.”  Further  on  he 
teaches  us  to  love  our  enemies,  just  as  a physician  loves  the  sick 
and  insane.  “ When  any  one  rages  against  thee,  let  him  rage,  but 
do  thou  entreat.  When  he  hates,  do  thou  pity.  It  is  his  fevered 
soul  which  hates  thee.  As  soon  as  he  is  well,  he  will  give  thee 
thanks.  How  do  physicians  love  the  sick  ? Do  they  wish  them 
always  to  be  sick?  They  love  the  sick  in  order  to  make  them 
whole.  How  much  do  they  suffer  from  the  insane ! What  re- 
proaches ! How  often  they  are  struck ! The  physician  attacks  the 
fever,  he  forgives  the  man.” 

Ver.  13. — In  this  we  know  that  we  abide  in  Him  ...  by  His 
Spirit , &c.  By  His  Spirit ',  i,e.  the  participation  of  the  Spirit,  the 
communication  of  grace  and  charity,  which  are  the  gifts  of  the 
Spirit 

In  the  preceding  verse  S.  John  said  that  God  abides  in  us,  and 
consequently  we  in  God  by  charity.  For  so  loving  He  abides  in 
the  lover  and  the  beloved.  For  so  God  loves  us  and  we  God.  He 
here  inculcates  the  same  thing,  repeats  it,  and  as  it  were  enforces  it 
by  a reason.  The  reason  is  this,  He  who  hath  the  Spirit  of  God 
abides  in  God,  and  God  in  him  : but  he  who  hath  charity  hath  the 
Spirit  of  God.  Therefore  he  who  hath  charity  abides  in  God  and 
God  in  him.  The  major  premiss  is  self-evident,  because  where  the 
Spirit  of  God  is,  there  is  God  Himself.  But  where  God  is,  there 
He  unites  to  Himself  the  subject  in  which  He  is,  and  by,  as  it  were, 
the  infinity  of  His  Essence  incorporates  and  absorbs  it,  so  that  the 
subject  should  be  more  in  God  than  God  in  it.  He  therefore  who 
hath  experience  in  himself  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  i.e.  of  charity,  this 
man  feels  God's  presence  and  liberality.  He  feels  God  to  be  in 
him  and  himself  in  God,  in  such  wise  that  God  is  bestowing  His 
gifts  upon  him,  and  printing  His  perfect  image  in  him,  according 
to  the  words,  “he  that  is  joined  to  the  Lord  is  one  Spirit.” 
(1  Cor.  xii.) 

Ver.  14. — And  we  have  seen  and  do  testify , &c.  These  words  have 
reference  to  the  9th  verse,  where  he  saith  that  God  hath  shown  His 
love  to  us  by  sending  His  Son.  This  he  now  proves  and  confirms  by 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


452  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  IV. 


his  own  testimony,  and  that  of  the  other  Apostles.  For  they  were 
the  eye  and  ear  witnesses,  who  saw,  heard,  and  conversed  with 
Christ  Incarnate,  as  he  said  in  the  beginning  of  the  Epistle. 

This  is  an  allusion  to  S.  John's  Gospel  (iii.  17).  “ For  God  sent 

not  His  Son  into  the  world  to  judge  the  world,  but  that  through  Him 
the  world  might  be  saved."  Whence  S.  Bernard  saith  (de  amot  Dei, 
c.  8),  “ Christ  Himself  is  our  Love,  by  whom  we  attain  to  Thee,  by 
whom  we  embrace  Thee : for  how  otherwise,  O incomprehensible 
Majesty,  couldest  Thou  appear  comprehensible  to  the  soul  that 
loveth  Thee  ? For  although  no  understanding  of  any  soul  or  spirit 
can  comprehend  Thee,  yet  the  love  of  the  loving  soul  comprehends 
Thee  wholly  as  thou  art." 

Ver.  15. — Whosoever  shall  confess  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,  &c. 
He  here  maintains  the  Divinity  of  Christ  because  Ebion,  Cerinthus, 
and  many  others  at  that  time  impugned  it.  This  is  as  it  were  a 
conclusion  drawn  from  the  preceding  verse.  As  though  he  said,  Christ 
is  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  Whosoever  therefore  believeth  in  Him, 
and  stedfastly  confesses  His  faith,  God  abideth  in  him,  and  he  in  God. 
He  abides,  I say,  by  a true,  living  faith  and  confession,  which  includes 
charity,  and  which  works  by  love.  As  S.  Augustine  says,  “ Whoso- 
ever shall  confess,  not  in  word,  but  in  deed,  not  in  tongue,  but  in 
life.  For  many  confess  in  words,  but  deny  by  their  deeds." 

Ver.  16. — And  we  know  and  have  believed  the  love  which  God  hath 
in  us.  In  these  words  S.  John  confirms  and  inculcates  what  he  has 
said  in  the  two  preceding  verses.  His  meaning  is,  “ We  have  seen 
and  do  testify  of  Christ  incarnate,  who  is  the  Love  of  God,  because 
we  know  Him  by  experience  and  conversation  to  be  really  such. 
And  we  have  believed  in  Him  by  faith.  Therefore  we  have  believed 
the  love  which  God  hath  in  us,  i.e.  towards  us,  because  we  have  believed 
that  God  in  his  infinite  love  towards  us  hath  given  to  us  Christ  the 
Saviour.  The  Vulg.  has  in  us,  but  the  Syriac  translates  towards  us. 
(So  also  the  Eng.  Version.) 

Observe : S.  John  moves  in  a circle.  From  God  he  leaps  to 
Christ,  from  Christ  to  charity,  from  charity  to  love  of  our  neighbour, 
from  charity  and  love  he  returns  to  God,  thence  to  Christ,  and  so  on. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


GOD  IS  LOVE. 


453 


For  all  these  things  have  reference  to  this  one  point,  that  we  should 
love  one  another.  And  this  is  his  argument,  God  in  His  infinite 
charity  hath  loved  us,  i.e.  all  men,  by  giving  Christ  His  Son  for  our 
salvation.  Therefore  it  is  just  that  we  should  imitate  His  charity, 
and  answer  to  His  love  by  loving  our  neighbours  and  doing  good  to 
them  in  His  love,  because  we  cannot  do  good  to  God  Himself. 

Observe : the  Vulgate  renders  more  significantly,  we  have  trusted 
in  the  charity  (credidimus  charitaie)  than  it  is  in  the  Greek  (we  have 
believed  the  charity  [ credidimus  charitatem]),  signifying  that  we  are 
joined  to  the  love  of  God,  not  only  by  faith,  but  likewise  by  hope 
and  charity.  We  have  not  only  known,  and  by  faith  believed  the 
mystery  of  the  Incarnation,  in  which  God’s  peculiar  love  to  us  shines 
forth,  but  we  have  wholly  trusted  and  committed  ourselves  to  the 
Divine  charity.  We  have  fixed  our  whole  faith,  hope,  and  love  upon 
it  We  rest  securely  upon  it  in  all  things,  certain  that  it  can  never 
fail  us,  and  saying  with  the  Psalmist,  “Whom  have  I in  heaven 
but  thee  ? and  there  is  none  upon  earth  which  I desire  in  comparison 
of  thee.  God  is  the  God  of  my  heart,  and  my  portion  for  eternity.,, 

God  is  love  : the  Syriac  reads,  for  God  is  love , giving  the  reason  why 
he  had  said,  and  we  have  believed  the  love , and  why  God  hath  love 
towards  us.  The  reason  is  because  God  Himself  by  His  Essence 
is  love.  Therefore  He  cannot  deceive  him  who  believes,  hopes  in, 
and  loves  Him. 

Now  the  reason  why  God  is  essentially  love  is  because  He 
Himself  in  His  Essence  is  pure,  perfect,  and  highest  goodness, 
whose  nature  it  is  to  be  plainly  and  fully  communicative  and 
diffusive  of  Himself.  This,  says  S.  Dionysius,  is  an  attribute  of  love. 
For  God  is  a sea  of  honey,  an  ocean  of  goodness  and  charity.  God 
is  as  it  were  a fire  always  burning,  kindling  all  things  and  transform- 
ing them  into  Itself.  For  “ our  God  is  a consuming  fire.”  (Heb. 
xiL  29.)  Listen  to  S.  Bernard  (, Serm . 83  in  Cant.) : “ I read,”  he 
says,  “that  God  is  love,  not  that  He  is  honour,  or  dignity.  It  is 
not  that  God  does  not  wish  to  be  honoured,  for  He  saith,  * If  I be 
a Father,  where  is  My  honour  ? 9 Honour  is  the  due  of  a father. 
But  if  he  manifest  Himself  as  a bridegroom,  I think  He  will 


Digitized  by 


Google 


454  first  epistle  general  of  s.  John,  c.  iv. 


change  His  voice  and  say,  ‘ If  I be  a Husband,  where  is  My  love  ? * 
For  before  this  He  had  spoken,  and  said,  * If  I be  a Master,  where 
is  My  fear? * God  therefore  requires  to  be  feared  as  a master,  to  be 
honoured  as  a father,  to  be  loved  as  a husband.  What  is  it  which 
shines  pre-eminently  amongst  these?  Surely  it  is  love.  Without 
love  fear  hath  torment,  and  honour  hath  no  grace.  Fear  is  slavish* 
until  it  be  manumitted  by  love.  And  the  honour  which  springs  not 
from  love  is  mere  flattery.  And  indeed  to  God  alone  belong 
honour  and  glory : yet  will  He  accept  of  neither  unless  they  be 
flavoured  with  the  honey  of  love.” 

Therefore  God  is  love,  because  love  is  as  it  were  a spiritual  flame, 
kindling  all,  and  like  light  shining  everywhere,  and  illuminating  all 
things.  Hence  S.  Dionysius  (de  Div . Nom.  c . 24, part  1)  says  that 
“ Divine  love  is  a motive  force  drawing  things  upward  to  God,  who 
alone  is  Himself  of  Himself  beautiful  and  good.”  On  these  words 
of  S.  Dionysius  our  Lessius  comments  thus  (de  Div . Altrib.  lib . 9, 
c.  2 and  3):  “For  by  this  very  thing  that  God  beholds  His  own 
infinite  beauty  and  excellence,  there  arises  in  Him  an  infinite  fire  of 
love,  by  which  he  loves  them  as  they  are  worthy  to  be  loved,  i.e. 
with  an  absolutely  infinite  love.  For  that  which  is  beautiful  and 
good,  as  soon  as  it  is  perceived,  kindles  love.  Wherefore  what  is 
infinitely  beautiful  and  good,  when  it  is  infinitely  known,  will  excite 
infinite  love;  infinite,  I say,  both  as  to  its  warmth,  and  as  to  its 
appreciation,  or,  as  the  Schoolmen  say,  infinite  intensively  and 
appreciatively.  2d.  That  which  is  beautiful  and  good  extends  It- 
self and  descends  to  the  creatures,  that  It  may  communicate  the 
same  to  them,  either  fully,  or  else  some  of  Its  rays  and  adumbra- 
tions, according  to  each  one’s  capacity  and  merits.  For  of  what 
we  supremely  love,  we  desire  to  make  known  to  all  the  excellency 
and  beauty,  and  that  its  sweetness  should  be  perceived  by  all,  so 
that  all  may  praise  it.  Love  does  the  same  in  God.  A third  effect 
of  this  love  is  that  it  raises  creatures  upward,  and  turns  them  to  the 
beautiful  and  good.  This  especially  obtains  with  angels  and  men : 
for  other  things  cannot  take  in  the  Divine  goodness  and  beauty. 
But  in  man  other  things  are  drawn  in  some  way  to  God,  both  be- 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


The  divine  love  is  EcsfATic.  45 S 

cause  all  the  other  steps  of  nature  are  in  him,  and  also  because  all 
other  things  are  for  him.  4th.  The  Divine  love  is  ecstatic,  because 
it  draws  the  lover  out  of  itself  to  the  thing  loved.  For  it  causes 
God  in  a sense  to  forget  His  loftiness,  and  inclines  Him  to  our 
humility,  and  makes  Him  to  be  wholly  occupied  in  the  business 
of  our  salvation.  The  token  of  which  is  the  Incarnation,  preaching, 
miracles,  His  passion,  death,  sacraments,  the  sending  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  the  perpetual  and  wonderful  government  of  His  Church, 
the  care  and  direction  of  individuals.  In  like  manner  it  sets  man 
outside  himself,  making  him  think  not  of  himself  and  his  own 
advantage,  but  only  of  God,  and  the  good  things  of  God.  Where- 
fore a great  lover  of  God  denies  himself,  renounces  his  own  desires, 
is  careless  about  benefits  for  himself ; forgets  himself,  and  is  wholly 
taken  up  with  the  things  of  God.  In  thought  and  affection  he  is 
wholly  outside  of  himself,  and  is  translated  to  his  beloved.  Such 
was  S.  Ignatius  the  Martyr,  who  said,  ‘My  Love  is  crucified.1 
Such  was  the  Apostle  S.  Paul,  who  said,  ‘ To  me  to  live  is  Christ, 
and  to  die  is  gain.’  There  is  an  illustrious  figure  of  this  in  the 
sun.  For  in  things  corporeal  the  sun  is  the  highest  beauty  and 
greatest.  Wherefore  S.  Gregory  Nazianzen  in  a certain  place  saith, 
* As  is  the  sun  in  things  sensible,  so  is  God  in  things  intellectual.’ 
From  the  sun  heat  descends  to  lower  things.  It  descends  also 
by  light.  And  things  are  illuminated  before  they  receive  heat. 
Receiving  heat  they  become  light,  and  are  carried  up  to  the  sky. 
The  sun  is  an  emblem  of  God,  and  light  of  wisdom,  warmth  of  love, 
and  earthly  things  of  souls  and  spirits.  Love  descends  from  God 
by  wisdom.  For  first  the  mind  is  enlightened  by  the  knowledge  of 
the  Divine  beauty  and  goodness : then  through  that  knowledge  it 
conceives  love.  Love  conceived  makes  the  soul  spiritual,  heavenly, 
and  presently  draws  it  upward,  and  unites  it  to  God,  and  makes  it 
like  to  Him,  the  only  and  eternal  One,  as  it  were  a parhelion,  which 
is  an  express  image  of  the  sun.” 

And  he  that  abideth  in  love,  &c.  And,  i.e.  therefore . For  this  is 
as  it  were  the  conclusion  from  the  premisses.  God  is  love,  there- 
fore he  that  remaineth  in  love,  remaineth  in  God,  because  God  and 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


45<5  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  IV. 

Love  are  one  and  the  same  thing.  And  God  in  him , as  in  a sort  of 
temple  of  love. 

Thus  love  has  united  God  to  man,  not  only  in  affection  and  care, 
but  also  effectually  and  substantially,  by,  in  truth,  an  hypostatic 
union.  But  it  unites  man  to  God,  so  that,  wholly  departing  out  ot 
himself,  he  passes  into  God,  and  as  it  were  loses  himself,  no  longer 
thinking  of  anything,  understanding  or  feeling  anything  but  God. 
Not  seeking,  or  desiring  any  other  thing,  having  joy  in  no  other 
thing  but  the  good  things  of  God.  He  who  is  thus  joined  to  God 
is  made  one  spirit  with  Him,  because  he  puts  off  himself,  and  puts 
on  God.  Wherefore,  as  if  he  was  altogether  transformed  into  the 
Divine  nature,  he  is  in  thought  and  affection  wholly  in  God.  Thus 
all  the  Saints  in  heaven  will  be  one  with  God  (this  the  Lord  prays 
for  them ,Jno.  xvii.),  because  they  all  acknowledge  their  own  nothing- 
ness, as  they  are  in  themselves,  and  value  themselves  at  nothing, 
except  so  far  as  they  belong  to  God,  and  are  for  Him.  And  in  this 
way  they  altogether  cease  from  themselves.  For  why  should  they 
abide  in  nothing  ? Thus  by  the  intellect  and  the  will  they  will  be 
most  powerfully  borne  to  Him,  and  will  be  wholly  in  Him.  And 
they  will,  as  it  were,  flow  into  Him,  and  be  transformed,  feeling  and 
tasting  nothing  else  but  God,  valuing  nothing  but  His  good,  alto- 
gether as  if  they  themselves  were  changed  into  God.  Listen  to  S. 
Augustine — He  who  abicUth  in  love , &c.  : “They  dwell  one  in  the 
other,  both  That  which  contains  and  that  which  is  contained.” 
Again  he  saith,  " Let  God  be  thy  house : be  thou  the  house  of  God. 
Abide  in  God,  and  let  God  abide  in  thee.  God  abides  in  thee  that 
He  may  contain  thee.  Thou  abidest  in  God  that  thou  mayest  not 
fall.  For  thus  speaks  the  Apostle  of  charity,  * Charity  never  falls.1 
How  can  he  fall  whom  God  holds  ? * 

For  this  cause,  namely  for  a symbol  of  love,  Christ  instituted,  and 
left  to  us  by  His  testament,  His  very  Self  in  the  Eucharist,  that 
indeed  He  might  remain  in  us,  and  we  in  Him,  not  by  a figure,  as 
the  heretics  say,  but  really,  substantially,  personally,  according  to 
the  words,  “ He  that  eateth  My  flesh  and  drinketh  My  blood  abideth 
in  Me  and  I in  him.”  (S.  Jno . vi.  54.)  The  Eucharist  therefore  is 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


God  and  man  united. 


457 


the  fuel  and  incentive  of  love,  which  S.  John  in  his  whole  epistle 
commends.  For  by  it,  as  S.  Chrysostom  says  {Horn,  54  in  Joan.), 
“ Not  only  in  love,  but  in  reality  let  us  be  changed  into  that  Flesh.” 
By  the  Food  which  he  has  bestowed  upon  us  this  is  brought  about. 
For  when  He  would  show  His  love  towards  us,  by  means  of  His 
Body  He  commingled  Himself  with  us,  and  brought  Himself  to  be 
one  with  us,  that  body  might  be  united  with  body.  For  this  is  the 
great  desire  of  lovers.”  Pope  Leo  teaches  the  same  thing.  “The 
participation  of  the  Body  and  Blood  of  Christ  does  this  very  thing, 
that  we  should  pass  into  that  which  we  receive.”  Lastly,  S.  Cyril 
of  Jerusalem  says,  “ Thus  we  shall  be  Christophus,  i.e.  Christ- 
bearers,  when  we  have  received  His  Body  and  Blood  into  our  mem- 
bers : and  thus,  as  Blessed  Peter  saith,  we  shall  * become  partakers 
of  the  Divine  nature.*  ” Wherefore  S.  Irenseus  (lib.  5 c.  6),  explain- 
ing 1 Thess.  v.  26,  “ that  your  whole  spirit,  soul,  and  body  may  be 
preserved,”  declares  that  the  perfect  man  is  renewed  by  the  Body 
and  Soul  (of  Christ)  and  the  Holy  Ghost  dwelling  in  him. 

Beautifully  does  S.  Bernard  say  (Serm.  7 1 in  Cant.),  “Who  is  he  who 
is  perfectly  joined  to  God  but  he  who  remains  in  God,  as  beloved  by 
God  ? He  has  drawn  God  to  himself  by  loving  Him  again.  There- 
fore since  man  and  God  are  wholly  united  between  themselves,  they 
are  united  by  a close  and  mutual,  as  it  were,  bosom  affection.  And 
that  in  this  way  God  is  in  man,  and  man  is  in  God,  I say  without 
any  doubt.  But  man  indeed  has  been  eternally  in  God,  as  being 
eternally  loved,  but  God  has  been  in  man  since  He  has  been  loved 
(by  man).”  Herein  is  that  saying  of  Cato  true,  “ Those  who  love 
are  in  a manner  dead  in  their  own  bodies,  but  live  in  another’s.” 
Therefore  God  by  love  willed  to  bring  us  back  to  our  first  beginning, 
to  unite  us,  that  is,  to  His  own  goodness  and  beauty,  to  transform 
us  into  Himself.  This  could  not  be  done  by  nature,  therefore  He 
found  a method  whereby  He  might  perfectly  accomplish  this  by  love, 
that  by  its  warmth  we  might  flow  into  and  be  absorbed  in  Him.  As 
S.  Bernard  says  (de  Delig.  Deo),  “In  that  what  is  felt  is  wholly 
Divine,  to  be  thus  affected  is  to  be  deified.  As  a little  drop  of  water 
infused  in  a great  quantity  of  wine  seems  wholly  to  lose  itself  whilst 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


458  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  IV. 

also  it  takes  the  colour  and  flavour  of  wine.  And  as  iron  made  red- 
hot  in  the  fire  becomes  exactly  like  (fire),  and  ceases  from  its  own 
original  appearance.  And  as  the  atmosphere  suffused  with  the 
solar  light  is  transformed  into  the  brightness,  so  that  it  seems  to  be 
not  so  much  illuminated,  as  light  itself.  Thus  it  will  be  necessary 
that  all  human  affection  in  the  Saints  should  in  an  ineffable  manner 
cease  from  itself,  and  be  wholly  transfused  into  the  will  of  God.” 
This  indeed  will  be  perfectly  accomplished  in  the  glory  of  heaven, 
but  it  is  begun  on  earth  by  charity  and  grace.  The  same  S.  Bernard 
(Serm.  83  in  Cant)  says,  “ Love  is  its  own  merit,  its  own  reward. 
Beyond  itself  it  requires  neither  cause  nor  enjoyment.  Its  enjoy- 
ment is  experience.  I love  because  I love.  I love  that  I may  love. 
A mighty  thing  is  love.  Yet  if  it  recur  to  its  origin,  if  it  be  brought 
back  to  its  beginning,  if  it  flow  back  to  its  fountain-head,  it  can 
always  take  of  itself  that  wherewith  it  may  flow.  Love  is  the 
only  one  of  all  the  motions,  senses,  and  affections  of  the  soul  in 
which  the  creature  can,  although  not  upon  an  equality,  yet  in  some 
likeness,  respond  to  its  Creator.” 

Moreover,  God  abiding  by  love  in  the  faithful  soul  produces  in  it 
these  effects.  First,  it  purifies  it  from  earthly  desires,  so  that  it  only 
seeks  for  and  accomplishes  heavenly  things.  Thus  king  Josaphat, 
when  he  was  converted  by  Barlaam,  burned  with  so  great  a fire  of 
love  that  he  left  his  kingdom,  in  his  pleasures  and  honours  ; and  as 
he  went  away  into  solitude  he  exclaimed,  “ Like  as  the  hart  desireth 
the  water  brooks,  so  longeth  my  soul  after  Thee,  O God.  My  soul 
cleaveth  unto  Thee,  O Christ.  Let  Thy  right  hand  uphold  me.” 
(jDamas.  Hist,  cap . 37.) 

2d.  The  soul  draws  all  its  powers,  senses,  affections,  love, 
faculties,  thoughts,  intentions  Godward,  so  that  it  thinks  only  of 
God,  sighs  for  Him,  according  to  those  words  of  S.  Basil,  “ Have 
continually  imprinted  in  thee  the  remembrance  of  God,  as  it  were 
an  indelible  mark.”  For  what  does  he  seek  for  without  who  has 
God  within  ? 

3d.  Love  causes  the  soul  to  desire  to  do  great  and  heroic  things 
for  God  her  beloved,  and  to  endure  many  things,  and  to  be  made 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


LOVE  ALL-ABSORBING. 


459 


like  unto  Christ  crucified.  Thus  while  the  Spouse  saith  in  the 
Canticles,  “ My  Beloved  is  mine,  and  I am  His,”  she  also  saith,  “ A 
bundle  of  myrrh  is  my  Beloved  unto  me,  He  shall  dwell  between 
my  breasts.”  Which  words  S.  Bernard  explains  thus  (. Sertn . 43), 
“ Myrrh  is  a harsh  and  bitter  thing,  and  signifies  the  harshness  of 
tribulations.  Looking  with  joyfulness  at  such  things  impending 
over  her  for  the  sake  of  her  Beloved,  the  Bride  speaks  thus,  being 
confident  that  she  can  bravely  endure  them  all.  ‘The  disciples,' 
it  says,  4 went  with  joy  from  the  presence  of  the  Council  because 
they  were  counted  worthy  to  suffer  shame  for  Jesus'  name.'  Lastly, 
the  Bride  speaks  not  of  a bunch,  but  a little  bunch  (fasciculus),  of 
myrrh , because  she  reckons  all  labours  and  sorrows  light  in  com- 
parison with  love.  Truly  ‘a  little  bunch,'  because  ‘the  sufferings 
of  this  present  time  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory 
which  shall  be  revealed  in  us.' " 

4th.  It  causes  the  soul  to  increase  in  love  day  by  day.  Listen  to 
S.  Bonaventura  speaking  of  the  charity  of  S.  Francis  (Lib,  1,  Vit.  ejus)\ 
“ As  it  were  a living  coal  of  fire  he  seemed  altogether  absorbed  in 
the  Divine  love.  For  as  soon  as  he  heard  speak  of  the  love  of  the 
Lord  he  was  affected,  roused  up,  inflamed,  as  though  the  inner  chord 
of  his  heart  were  struck  by  the  bow  of  the  voice.  In  the  midst  of 
beauty  he  beheld  Him  the  most  beautiful,  and  by  means  of  His 
footsteps  impressed  on  visible  things  He  followed  His  Beloved 
everywhere,  making  of  all  things  a ladder  for  himself  by  which  he 
might  mount  up  to  apprehend  Him  who  is  altogether  desirable." 
And  again,  “ He  was  inflamed  with  love  towards  the  Sacrament  of 
the  Lord's  Body  with  a thrill  in  every  pulse,  being  lost  in  utter 
amazement  at  that  most  loving  condescension  of  the  Divine  love.” 

In  chap.  13  he  treats  of  the  sacred  stigmata.  “The  furnace  of 
the  love  of  the  Blessed  Jesus  had  grown  in  him  to  lamps  of  fire  and 
flames.  Since  therefore  he  was  drawn  to  God  by  the  ardour  of 
seraphic  desires,  and  was  transformed  into  Him  by  the  fellowship  of 
His  sufferings  who,  out  of  his  exceeding  love,  willed  to  be  crucified, 
he  beheld  a seraph  having  six  burning  and  glorious  wings.  There 
appeared  between  the  wings  the  likeness  of  one  crucified.  He 


Digitized  by  CnOOQle 


460  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  IV. 

understood  from  this  that  he  should  be  wholly  transformed,  not  t>y 
the  martyrdom  of  the  flesh,  but  by  the  inflaming  of  his  mind  into  the 
likeness  of  Christ  crucified.  When  the  vision  disappeared  it  left  in 
his  heart  a marvellous  ardour : in  his  flesh  also  it  left  a no  less 
wonderful  impress  of  the  signs  (of  Christ  crucified).” 

5th.  It  causes  the  soul  which  is  kindled  with  the  love  of  God  to  be 
in  earnest  to  kindle  the  whole  world  with  the  same  love.  Thus  the 
Blessed  Jacoponus,  when  he  heard  of  some  sin  by  which  God  was 
offended,  burning  with  charity,  was  wont  to  be  greatly  troubled,  and 
would  straightway  weep.  When  he  was  asked  “ why  ? ” he  would 
answer,  “ Because  Love  is  not  loved.”  Love  is  burning  and  hath 
wings.  There  is  no  tarrying  in  love.  As  S.  Bernard  says,  “ Love  is 
nothing  else  than  a burning  will  for  good.  He  therefore  who  hath 
no  zeal  hath  no  love.” 

6th.  It  causes  that  the  soul  which  loves  God  should,  by  its  love  and 
confidence  in  Him,  as  it  were  rule  over  Him,  and  obtain  from  Him 
everything  it  asks.  Thus  it  becomes  as  it  were  almighty,  as  Jacob 
struggling  with  the  angel,  God’s  vicar,  prevailed  over  him,  and  so 
was  called  Israel,  i.e.  “ruling  God.”  Hence  the  paradox,  “To  a 
believer  belongs  the  whole  world  of  riches.”  Wherefore  S.  Francis 
says,  “ Fly  from  the  creatures,  if  you  wish  to  possess  the  creatures.” 

7th.  God  makes  the  loving  soul  like  unto  Himself  in  character  and 
virtues,  and  so  makes  it  to  be  conscious  of  His  secrets.  He  reveals 
to  it  the  secrets  of  hearts,  and  things  distant,  and  yet  to  come,  as 
He  did  to  His  Apostles  and  Prophets. 

8th.  This  love  tranquillises  the  soul,  makes  it  calm  and  imper- 
turbed,  yea  glad  and  joyful  in  adversity  as  well  as  prosperity.  Thus 
it  always  exults  in  God,  and  gives  Him  thanks.  It  praises  and 
blesses  Him,  singing  with  the  Psalmist,  “ I will  bless  the  Lord  at  all 
times : His  praise  shall  ever  be  in  my  mouth  ” (xxxiv.  1).  And  it 
saith,  “ As  oft  as  I breathe,  I breathe  unto  Thee,  O my  God.” 

Lastly,  this  love  so  increases  in  very  eminent  saints  that  it  brings 
on  a sort  of  languor,  and  at  last  death  itself,  according  to  the  words 
of  the  Spouse  ( Cant . ii.  15),  “ Prop  me  up  with  flowers,  support  me 
with  apples,  for  I am  sick  through  love.  His  left  arm  shall  be  under 


Digitized  by 


Google" 


PERFECT  CHARITY  GIVES  CONFIDENCE. 


461 


my  head,  and  His  right  arm  shall  embrace  me,”  Thus  the  Blessed 
Virgin,  languishing  and  panting  for  her  Son,  breathed  out  her  soul 
into  His  hands,  not  from  any  disease,  but  from  love  and  desire  of 
enjoying  Christ  her  Son.  So  teach  Suarez,  Canisius,  and  others. 

Ver.  17. — In  this  is  the  love  of  God  perfected, \ that  we  should  have 
confidence , &c.  Conf  Greek  flra^<r/av,  i.e.  liberty,  boldness  in  speaking, . 
1st.  In  this , i.e.  with  this  end  and  fruit  Perfect  charity  produces 
this  result,  viz.,  confidence  in  the  day  of  judgment — both  the  par- 
ticular and  the  general  judgment  Hence  the  righteous  desire  the 
coming  of  the  Lord,  and  desire  like  Paul  to  be  dissolved,  and  to  be 
with  Christ  As  S.  Augustine  says,  “ They  live  with  patience,  and 
die  with  delight.”  John  descends  from  charity  to  its  fruits.  Of 
these  he  enumerates  thus:  (1.)  Confidence  to  live  and  die  trust- 
fully. (2.)  That  the  loving  soul  becomes  without  fear.  (3.)  That 
she  obtains  of  God  whatever  she  asks. 

2d.  And  more  powerfully.  In  this , i.e.  God  hath  loved  us  and 
doth  love  us  to  such  a purpose,  and  we  in  our  turn  are  so  allured 
by  this  precious  love  that  we  fully  and  perfectly  love  Him  back 
again.  And  He  so  abides,  I say,  in  us,  that  when  we  shall  be 
examined  by  Him  in  the  day  of  judgment  concerning  charity,  we 
shall  answer  with  confidence  that  we  have  loved,  not  the  world,  but 
Him,  with  our  whole  heart,  and  therefore  He  will  award  us  the  bliss 
of  heaven. 

3d.  Others  explain  the  words  in  this  as  follows: — By  this  sign 
we  know  that  we  have  perfect  love,  if  casting  fear  away  we  can 
anticipate  the  judgment  day  with  great  hope  and  confidence.  From 
hence  S.  Augustine  draws  this  conclusion,  “Therefore,  brethren, 
take  heed,  strive  inwardly  with  yourselves  that  ye  desire  the  day 
of  judgment  In  no  other  way  is  charity  proved  to  be  perfect 
except  when  that  day  begins  to  be  longed  for.” 

Because  as  He  is,  so  are  we  in  this  world, \ Who  is  He  ? First, 
God,  whom  shortly  before  he  had  spoken  of.  It  means — Therefore 
shall  we  have  confidence  in  the  day  of  judgment  because  we  are 
in  charity,  and  live  in  this  world  perfected  in  it,  so  that  we  love 
even  our  enemies,  So  too  God  in  His  perfect  love  makes  His  sun 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


462  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  IV. 


to  shine  upon  the  evil  and  the  good,  and  sendeth  rain  upon  the 
just  and  the  unjust. 

2d.  And  more  profoundly : He,  namely  Christ,  whom,  as  my  love, 

I always  carry  in  my  mind  and  my  mouth.  For  this  reason,  S. 
John  when  he  says  He  is *,  means  Christ  Moreover  Christ  is,  i.e. 
in  this  world \ as  the  Syriac  version  renders.  And  even  now  He  is 
by  the  providence,  charity,  and  friendship  by  which  He  dwells  in 
the  minds  of  His  saints  endowed  with  charity.  The  meaning  then 
is  this  : As  He,  Christ,  lived  in  this  world  holy  and  immaculate,  and 
being  full  of  the  love  of  God,  was,  and  is,  dead  to  the  world,  and  so 
abides  in  us ; so  let  us,  in  imitation  of  Him,  strive  to  live  holily  and 
without  spot  in  this  world.  Yea,  as  being  dead  to  the  world,  and 
always  bearing  about  in  our  body  with  Paul  the  death  of  Christ,  we 
are  full  of  love  even  to  our  enemies,  and  abide  in  Christ.  There- 
fore we  have  confidence  that  in  the  day  of  judgment  we  shall  not 
be  confounded,  but  shall  be  glorified.  For  we  have  that  day  ever 
before  our  eyes,  and  we  daily  dispose  ourselves  for  it  by  works  of 
charity  and  every  kind  of  holiness.  Yea,  we  pant  for  it,  knowing 
that  here  we  are  pilgrims,  and  guests  for  a day ; according  to  the 
words,  “ Every  one  that  hath  this  hope,  purifieth  himself  in  Him 
even  as  He  is  holy.” 

Ver.  18. — Fear  is  not  in  charity,  but  perfect  charity , &c.  From 
the  confidence  which  is  begotten  of  love  the  Apostle  passes  to 
that  banishment  of  fear  which  is  the  child  of  confidence. 

You  will  ask,  What  is  this  fear  which  perfect  charity  drives  away? 
I answer,  Manifold.  For  S.  John’s  declaration  is  general,  and  may 
cover  every  kind  of  fear.  It  means,  charity  hath  no  fear  whatso- 
ever. It  is  devoid  of  fear,  free,  joyful,  spirited  and  liberal.  First 
then,  “Fear”  says  Vatablus,  “is  here  put  for  despair  and  the  confu- 
sion of  conscience : the  fear  by  which  sinners  dread  damnation, 
and  despair  of  salvation.” 

2d.  It  is  the  fear  by  which  those  newly  converted  are  tormented, 
those  whom  the  remembrance  of  their  past  sins  vexes  and  troubles, 
lest  it  may  be  they  are  not  entirely  forgiven. 

3d.  It  is  servile  fear  by  which  mere  servants  and  the  imperfect 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


LOVE  AND  FEAR. 


4^3 


do  the  commandments  of  God  from  fear  of  punishment,  not  from 
love  of  justice.  Pure,  sincere,  and  liberal  charity  drives  away  this 
fear.  For  it  keeps  God's  commands  by  the  love  of  God.  This  fear, 
says  S.  Augustine  on  this  passage,  induces  love,  as  the  bristle  brings 
on  the  thread  of  the  cordwainer.  Wherefore  it  is  said  ( Ecclus . i. 
28),  " He  that  is  without  fear  cannot  be  justified."  For  chastened 
and  filial  fear  abides  with  charity,  and  increases  as  charity  increases. 
The  more  perfect  and  holy  any  one  is,  the  more  he  fears  and 
reverences  God  with  filial  love  and  fear,  and  fears  to  offend  Him  in 
the  very  slightest  degree.  This  is  the  fear  with  which  the  just  are 
bid  to  fear  God.  (Ps.  xxxiii.  10.)  For  this  fear  endureth  for  ever 
and  ever.  (Ps.  xio.) 

4th.  This  fear  may  be  taken  to  mean  that  worldly  fear  by  which, 
through  dread  of  parents,  relations,  &c,  any  one  breaks  the  command- 
ments of  God.  These  are  the  fearful  whose  portion  is  in  the  lake 
of  fire.  (Apoc.  xxi.  8).  Love  drives  away  such  fear  as  this. 

5th.  This  fear  may  be  taken  to  mean  that  anxious  fear  with  which 
those  who  are  scrupulous  and  fearfully  anxious  dread  in  trifles  to 
offend  God.  For  perfect  love  banishes  scrupulosity.  It  is  not 
scrupulous,  but  free,  bold,  and  magnanimous.  As  it  is  said  (Rom. 
viii  15),  We  have  not  received  the  spirit  of  bondage,  &c. 

6th.  This  fear  may  be  taken  for  the  fear  of  punishment  and 
damnation.  This  too  charity  puts  to  flight  For  the  saints  are 
thoughtful  about  their  reward  rather  than  full  of  dread  of  punish- 
ment. So  our  Lessius,  to  one  who  told  him  about  a certain  worthy 
man  who  wished  to  undergo  purgatory  until  the  day  of  judgment, 
if  so  be  he  might  thereby  obtain  everlasting  salvation,  replied,  that 
Christians  ought  to  have  more  hope  than  to  purchase  the  certainty 
of  heavenly  glory  by  so  long  purgatorial  pains.  However,  the  saints 
always  have  in  this  life  fear,  if  not  actual,  yet  potential,  mingled 
with  their  hope,  because  they  are  not  certain  of  salvation. 

7th.  This  fear  may  be  understood  of  the  fear  of  persecutors,  loss, 
or  shame  which  meet  us  in  heroic  works  of  charity.  This  fear  the 
Magdalene  drove  away  by  her  burning  love  for  Christ  when  she 
fearlessly  sought  Him  at  His  tomb  in  the  midst  of  the  soldiers. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


464  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  IV. 


Whence  the  Church  sings  concerning  her,  “ Love  drives  away  fear.” 
As  our  Saviour  saith,  “ Fear  not  them  which  kill  the  body.” 

8th.  This  fear  may  be  understood  of  that  initiatory  fear,  by  which 
any  one  fears  to  commit  a fault,  as  he  fears  punishment.  This 
charity  drives  away,  as  far  as  the  fear  of  punishment  is  concerned. 
Perfect  charity  dreads  the  fault,  not  the  punishment. 

Perfect  charity  overcomes  all  these  kinds  of  fear,  but  especially 
that  servile  fear  with  which  we  timidly  and  pusillanimously  fear 
punishment,  and  the  judgment  and  vengeance  of  God.  For  this 
kind  of  fear  originates  in  self-love,  which  the  love  of  God  conquers 
and  drives  away.  Perfect  charity  looks  upon  God,  not  as  a judge 
and  an  avenger,  but  as  a Father  and  a Husband.  As  Sarah, 
Abraham’s  spouse,  drove  away  her  slave  Agar,  so  does  charity 
banish  servile  fear. 

Observe : usually  the  beginning  of  justification  in  a sinner  com- 
mences with  the  fear  of  punishment  and  hell.  Being  struck  with 
this  by  God  he  begins  to  think  about  his  salvation,  and  to  dispose 
himself  to  repentance,  as  the  Council  of  Trent  teaches  (Sess.  6,  cap . 
6).  Then  being  justified,  this  fear  ceases  by  degrees.  “ Fear,”  says 
S.  Augustine,  “is  the  servant  of  charity.”  And  again,  “Fear  is  the 
guardian  and  schoolmaster  of  the  law  until  charity  comes.” 

Finally,  S.  Augustine  (dc  Civit.  lib.  14,  c.  9)  applies  these  things 
to  the  heavenly  glory.  For  thus  the  security  of  love  excludes  all 
fear.  “By  a good  life,”  he  says,  “a  good  conscience  is  prepared, 
so  that  having  a good  conscience  there  is  no  fear  of  punishment* 
Wherefore  let  the  man  who  does  not  wish  to  fear  learn  to  fear. 
Let  him  who  would  be  secure  eternally  learn  to  be  careful  in  time.” 
And  again,  “ The  nearer  we  get  to  the  country  whither  we  are  going 
the  less  is  our  fear.  Greater  ought  to  be  the  fear  of  the  wayfarers, 
less  the  fear  of  those  who  are  drawing  nigh  to  their  journey’s  end, 
none  at  ail  the  fear  of  those  who  have  reached  their  destination. 
Thus  fear  leads  to  charity,  and  perfect  charity  casts  fear  out  of 
doors.”  But  this  is  the  anagogical  meaning.  S.  John  asserts 
that  literally  those  who  have  perfect  charity  banish  fear  even  in  this 
life.  So  S.  Antony  said,  “ I do  not  now  fear  God,  but  I love  Him, 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


CHARITY  HAS  NO  FEAR  OF  TORMENT. 


4<$5 


because  perfect  love  casts  fear  out-of-doors.”  And  S.  Ignatius,  the 
Founder  of  our  Society,  was  wont  to  say,  that  if  God  were  to  give 
him  his  choice  either  of  dying,  and  going  certainly  to  Heaven,  or 
of  living  and  augmenting  the  glory  of  God,  but  with  uncertainty  of 
salvation,  he  would  choose  the  latter  alternative.  For,  said  he,  if  I 
so  love  God,  that  for  love  of  Him  I expose  myself  to  peril  of 
salvation,  surely  He,  who  is  far  above  me  in  love,  will  not  suffer 
Himself  to  be  surpassed  in  love,  but  will  take  all  the  peril  upon 
Himself,  and  will  secure  my  salvation.  Thus  St.  Salvius,  who  was 
already  dead  and  about  to  enter  heaven,  heard  a voice  saying, 
“ Let  him  return  to  the  body,  he  is  still  necessary  to  My  Church.” 
When  he  heard  it  he  answered  with  groans,  “Lord,  if  I return,  I 
shall  be  exposed  to  peril,  and  perhaps  shall  never  return  hither.” 
Then  he  heard  the  words,  “ Go.  I will  be  thy  keeper,  and  will  surely 
bring  thee  back  hither.”  (S.  Greg.  Turon.  lib . 7,  Hist.  c.  1.) 

For  fear  hath  torment.  The  meaning  is,  Fear  begets  the  torment  of 
the  mind  with  which  a man  torments  himself  when  he  thinks  of, 
and  dreads,  impending  evil  and  punishment.  But  charity  has  no 
fear  or  torment,  but  joy  and  gladness. 

Ver.  19. — Therefore  let  us  love  God , &c.  This  is  the  conclusion,  in 
which  he  repeats  and  inculcates  zeal  for  charity,  because  God  first 
loved  us,  and  by  loving  has  inspired  us  with  this  love,  and  made  us 
lovers  of  Himself.  (S.  Augustine , lib.  de  Gratia  Christie  c.  26.) 

Ver.  20. — If  any  man  shall  say , I love  God,  &c.  Because  the  love 
of  God  extends  itself  to  love  of  our  neighbour,  who  is  the  image  of 
God,  and  contains  and  embraces  it.  This  he  shows  by  two  argu- 
ments. The  first  is, 

For  he  who  loveth  not  his  brother  whom  he  sees  (Greek  s’wgaxi, 
hath  seen),  &c.  Because  it  is  a provision  of  nature  that  love  and 
affection  should  be  carried  to  sensible  things  which  we  see. 
For  the  eyes  are  guides  in  love.  For,  as  S.  Gregory  says  (Horn. 
11  in  Evang.),  “From  the  things  which  the  mind  knows  let  it  rise 
to  the  things  unknown,  that  from  the  love  of  what  it  knows  it  may 
learn  to  love  also  the  things  unknown.” 

Ver.  21. — (The  second  reason.)  And  this  commandment  have  we 
VOL.  v.  2 G 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


466  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  IV. 


from  God ',  &c.  For,  as  S.  Augustine  says,  “ If  he  is  thy  brother,  and 
thou  lovest  him  not,  how  dost  thou  love  God,  whose  commandment 
thou  despisest  ? ” And  again,  “ O merciful  Lord,  what  am  I to  Thee, 
that  Thou  shouldest  bid  me  love  Thee  ? Who  threatenest  me  with 
huge  miseries,  being  angry  if  I love  Thee  not,  and  giving  me  many 
promises  if  I do  love  Thee  ? And  what,  O my  Love,  what  pleasure 
dost  Thou  find  in  me?  What  king  saith  to  his  slave,  Let  us  be 
friends,  and  I will  give  thee  a province  ? 99 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


( 46 7 ) 


CHAPTER  V. 

I  He  that  loveth  God  loveth  His  children , and  keepeth  His  commandments:  3 which 
to  the  faithful  are  lights  and  not  grievous . 9 Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,  able  to 

save  us,  14  and  to  hear  our  prayers , which  we  make  for  ourselves , and  for 
others. 

WHOSOEVER  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  born  of  God  : and  every 
one  that  loveth  him  that  begat  loveth  him  also  that  is  begotten  of  him. 

2  By  this  we  know  that  we  love  the  children  of  God,  when  we  love  God,  and 
keep  his  commandments. 

3  For  this  is  the  love  of  God,  that  we  keep  his  commandments  : and  his  com- 
mandments are  not  grievous. 

4  For  whatsoever  is  born  of  God  overcometh  the  world  : and  this  is  the  victory 
that  overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith. 

5  Who  is  he  that  overcometh  the  world,  but  he  that  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the 
Son  of  God  ? 

6  This  is  he  that  came  by  water  and  blood,  even  Jesus  Christ ; not  by  water 
only,  but  by  water  and  blood.  And  it  is  the  Spirit  that  beareth  witness,  because 
the  Spirit  is  truth. 

7  For  there  are  three  that  bear  record  in  heaven,  the  Father,  the  Word,  and 
the  Holy  Ghost : and  these  three  are  one. 

8  And  there  are  three  that  bear  witness  in  earth,  the  spirit,  and  the  water,  and 
the  blood  : and  these  three  agree  in  one. 

9  If  we  receive  the  witness  of  men,  the  witness  of  God  is  greater : for  this  is 
the  witness  of  God  which  he  hath  testified  of  his  Son. 

10  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  of  God  hath  the  witness  in  himself : he  that 
believeth  not  God  hath  made  him  a liar ; because  he  believeth  not  the  record  that 
God  gave  of  his  Son. 

1 1  And  this  is  the  record,  that  God  hath  given  to  us  eternal  life,  and  this  life 
is  in  his  Son. 

12  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life ; and  he  that  hath  not  the  Son  of  God  hath 
not  life. 

13  These  things  have  I written  unto  you  that  believe  on  the  name  of  the  Son 
of  God  ; that  ye  may  know  that  ye  have  eternal  life,  and  that  ye  may  believe  on 
the  name  of  the  Son  of  God. 

14  And  this  is  the  confidence  that  we  have  in  him,  that,  if  we  ask  any  thing 
according  to  his  will,  he  heareth  us : 

15  And  if  we  know  that  he  hear  us,  whatsoever  we  ask,  we  know  that  we  have 
the  petitions  that  we  desired  of  him. 

16  If  any  man  see  his  brother  sin  a sin  which  is  not  unto  death,  he  shall  ask. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


468  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  V. 

and  he  shall  give  him  life  for  them  that  sin  not  unto  death.  There  is  a sin  unto 
death  : I do  not  say  that  he  shall  pray  for  it. 

17  All  unrighteousness  is  sin  : and  there  is  a sin  not  unto  death. 

18  We  know  that  whosoever  is  born  of  God  sinneth  not ; but  he  that  is 
begotten  of  God  keepeth  himself,  and  that  wicked  one  toucheth  him  not. 

16  And  we  know  that  we  are  of  God,  and  the  whole  world  lieth  in  wickedness. 

20  And  we  know  that  the  Son  of  God  is  come,  and  hath  given  us  an  under- 
standing, that  we  may  know  him  that  is  true,  and  we  are  in  him  that  is  true,  even 
in  his  Son  Jesus  Christ.  This  is  the  true  God,  and  eternal  life. 

21  Little  children,  keep  yourselves  from  idols.  Amen. 

Ver.  1. — Every  one  that  believeth , with  a living  faith,  which  extends 
itself  to  charity,  and  worketh  by  love,  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ , i.e. 
the  Messiah,  the  Saviour  and  Redeemer  of  the  world,  is  bom  of 
God,  by  a divine  and  spiritual  birth,  which  takes  place  by  faith, 
love,  and  grace,  by  which  a man  becomes  not  only  a friend,  but  a 
son  and  heir  of  God,  and  a partaker  of  the  Divine  nature  (2  Pet  L 5). 

And  every  one  . . . loveth  also  Him  who  is  bom  of  Him.  Bom: 
1st.  Christ  the  Son  of  God  is  properly  He  who  is  born  of  God  the 
Father.  2d.  Bom  of  God  applies  to  every  believer,  who  is  adopted 
of  God  through  the  grace  of  Christ.  And  this  is  S.  John's  reasoning, 
by  which  he  proves  that  our  neighbours  ought  to  be  loved : Whoso- 
ever loveth  God  the  Father  who  begat,  loveth  equally  God  the  Son 
who  was  begotten.  But  he  who  loveth  God  the  Son  loveth  also 
all  the  other  sons  of  God,  as  being  His  brethren  and  members. 
Therefore  he  who  loveth  God  the  Father  loveth  also  all  the  children 
of  God  who  are  born  of  Him.  It  is  in  favour  of  this  exposition, 
says  S.  Augustine,  that  the  Apostle  here  says  Son  in  the  singular 
as  understanding  the  Only  Begotten  of  the  Father.  But  presently, 
in  the  next  verse  he  says  sons  in  the  plural,  as  intending  the  just, 
by  adoDtion  and  regeneration  sons  of  God. 

Ver.  2. — By  this  we  know  that  we  love  the  children  (rsxva)  of  God \ 
when  (Mav,  Le.  because ) we  love  God , &c.  We  know9  i.e.  we  conclude , 

we  show  and  demonstrate \ S.  John  uses  this  expression,  we  know, 
in  a similar  sense  iii.  16  and  19,  and  iv.  2 and  6.  We  ktioiu , i.e. 
we  are  convinced  that  we  love  Christians  as  the  children  of  God.  We 
know  this,  i.e.  we  prove  it  by  this  argument,  that  we  love  God.  The 
following  is  S.  John's  syllogism  and  demonstration.  All  the  sons 


Digitized  by  LnOOQle 


THE  CHARITY  OF  GOD.  469 

of  God  are  believers  and  Christians.  Whosoever  therefore  loves 
God  loves  also  the  children  of  God.  Therefore  he  who  loves  God 
loves  faithful  Christians  as  being  the  brethren  and  members  of 
Christ,  bom  of  the  same  God  the  Father.  For  as  from  the  love  of 
our  neighbour  we  infer  and  conclude  the  love  of  God,  so  in  turn 
and  reciprocally  from  the  love  of  God  we  infer  and  conclude  the 
love  of  our  neighbour.  Again,  whosoever  keeps  the  commands  of 
God  keeps  also  the  love  of  his  neighbour : for  this  is  one  of  the 
commandments.  But  he  who  keeps  the  command  of  love,  this  man 
loves  his  neighbour.  Therefore  whosoever  keeps  the  commands  of 
God  is  a lover  of  his  neighbour. 

Moreover,  in  this  place  S.  John  does  not  speak  of  all  our  neigh- 
bours, but  only  of  such  as  are  born  of  God,  that  is,  believing 
Christians,  because  he  seeks  to  kindle  amongst  them  mutual  love, 
in  order  that  by  their  faith  and  Christian  life  they  may  defend, 
animate,  help,  and  be  profitable  to  one  another  against  the  heathen. 

Ver.  3. — For  this  is  the  charity  of  God,  &c.  He  means,  Charity 
consists  in  the  keeping  of  the  commandments  of  God.  For  charity 
is  the  love  and  friendship  of  God.  For  this  is  what  is  said  ( Wisd. 
vi.  9),  “Love  is  the  keeping  of  His  laws.”  So  it  is  said  in  Eccles. 
xii.  13,  “Fear  God  and  keep  His  commandments,  for  this  is  the 
whole  man.”  It  means,  the  whole  good  of  man  ; all  his  duty,  all  his 
happiness ; his  end  and  perfection  consist  in  the  fear  of  God.  As 
S.  Jerome  says,  “ For  this  man  was  created.”  And  as  Salonius  says, 
He  who  lives  otherwise  is  not  a man  but  a beast,  because  he  does 
not  live  according  to  reason,  which  pertains  to  man's  nature.  But 
if  he  lives  gluttonously,  he  lives  like  a hog.  If  he  lives  deceitfully, 
he  lives  like  a fox.  If  he  lives  proudly,  he  lives  like  a lion,  and  so 
on.  All  this  you  may  apply  to  charity. 

And  His  commandments  are  not  heavy  {gravid),  much  less  impossible, 
as  heretics  say.  He  alludes  to  the  words  of  Christ,  “ My  yoke  is 
sweet,  and  My  burden  light” 

The  reason  is,  1st.  Because  Christ  has  freed  Christians  from  the 
heavy  and  manifold  burden  of  the  ceremonial  and  judicial  precepts 
of  the  Old  Law,  and  has  imposed  upon  them  only  the  moral  Law, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


470  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  V. 


or  the  ten  precepts  of  the  natural  Law,  adding  to  them  a few  things 
concerning  faith,  baptism,  and  the  rest  of  the  sacraments.  The 
Rabbi  Moses  numbers  218  positive,  and  365  negative,  precepts 
of  the  Old  Law  [More  Hanncbuchim,  caps . 56  and  57).  From  all 
these  Christ  has  set  us  free. 

2d.  Because  to  charity  and  him  who  loves  God  nothing  is  heavy. 
" For  how  can  it  be  heavy  when  it  is  the  command  of  love  ? For 
either  a man  loves  not,  and  thus  it  is  heavy ; or  else  he  does  love, 
and  it  cannot  be  heavy,”  says  S.  Augustine. 

3d.  Because  Christ  gives  grace  as  it  were  wings,  with  which  we 
fulfil  the  commandments.  Yea,  we  as  it  were  fly  over  them,  accord- 
ing to  the  words,  " I ran  the  way  of  Thy  commandments  when 
Thou  hadst  enlarged  my  heart.”  (Ps.  cxix.)  As  S.  Augustine  says, 
“ There  is  nothing  heavy  either  in  loving,  or  fearing.  For  perfect 
love  casts  out  fear,  and  makes  the  burden  of  the  commandment 
light,  not  depressing  to  the  ground  with  its  weight,  but  lifting  it  up 
instead  of  wings.  Let  the  soul  therefore  which  feels  the  command- 
ments heavy,  pray  and  sigh  with  the  will  that  it  may  obtain  the  gift 
of  the  sense  of  lightness.”  Wherefore  S.  Bonaventura  says,  “ The 
commandments  are  heavy  to  fallen  and  corrupt  nature,  but  light  to 
that  which  is  whole  and  sound.”  For  grace  heals  our  nature,  even 
as  sin  wounds  and  as  it  were  maims  it.  Therefore  sin  makes  the 
commandments  to  be  as  “ a talent  of  lead.”  ( Zech . v.  7.) 

4th.  Because,  although  certain  things  be  heavy  in  themselves, 
such  as  to  mortify  all  the  lusts,  to  undergo  martyrdom,  to  suffer  all 
adversity,  yet  they  become  light  when  we  consider  the  example  of 
Christ  and  His  Saints,  and  God’s  promise  of  heavenly  glory,  accord- 
ing as  S.  Paul  says,  “ The  sufferings  of  this  present  time  are  not 
comparable  to  the  future  glory  which  shall  be  revealed  in  us.” 

As  S.  Augustine  says  (Serm.  18  de  Sanct.\  “If  we  must  needs 
endure  daily  torments,  if  hell  itself  for  a brief  space,  that  we  might 
be  worthy  to  behold  Christ  coming  in  His  glory,  and  to  be  reckoned 
in  the  company  of  His  Saints,  would  it  not  be  worth  while  to  suffer 
anything  that  is  sad,  so  that  we  were  made  partakers  of  such  great 
good  and  such  great  glory  ? ” 


Digitized  by 


,°°g 


Ic 


VICTORIOUS  FAITH. 


471 


Ver.  4. — For  every  thing  ivhich  is  bom  of  God \ &c.  He  proves 
what  he  had  said  that  His  commandments  are  not  heavy , because  the 
faithful,  who  are  bom  again  of  faith  and  charity,  and  are  armed  by 
God,  overcome  the  world,  ie.  the  lusts  and  terrors  of  the  world, 
which  alone  resist  charity,  and  make  the  keeping  of  the  command- 
ments difficult  When  therefore  they  are  taken  away,  the  com- 
mandments become  easy.  “The  proof  of  a heavenly  generation 
is  victory  over  temptation,”  says  S.  Bernard. 

Observe : he  says  every  thing  (neuter),  not  every  one  who  is  bom 
of  God  overcometh . This  is  to  signify,  1st.  That  this  victory  falls 
to  the  believer,  not  of  himself,  but  from  the  love  and  grace  of  God. 
This  is  why  he  adds  by  way  of  explanation,  And  this  is  the  victory 
which  overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith. 

2d.  The  expression  every  thing  is  emphatic,  and  signifies  the 
whole  company  of  all  nations.  There  is  an  allusion  to  the  animals 
of  every  kind,  both  clean  and  unclean,  which  were  in  Noe’s  ark, 
and  which  Peter  saw  in  vision  in  the  linen  sheet  of  the  Church. 
(Acts.  x.  12.)  By  these  it  was  signified  that  all  sorts  of  men,  of 
every  nation,  state,  and  condition,  were  to  be  admitted  into  the 
Church  by  the  new  Birth  of  Baptism.  For  the  same  reason,  and 
with  the  same  emphasis,  Christ  said,  “ Every  thing  that  the  Father 
giveth  Me  shall  come  to  Me.” 

Hence  S.  Cyprian,  S.  Leo,  and  others  say  that  a believer  is 
greater  than  the  world,  and  having  his  conversation  in  heaven  he 
looks  down  upon  the  little  point  of  the  world.  Beautifully  does 
S.  Augustine  write  (lib.  2 de  Synub . and  Catechum.),  “Admirable, 
truly  admirable,  is  our  combat  ” (spectaculum),  “ in  which  God  helps, 
faith  obtains  strength,  innocence  fights,  holiness  conquers,  and  the 
reward  which  follows  is  such  that  whilst  he  who  has  conquered  re- 
ceives, he  who  gives  loses  nothing.” 

And  this  is  the  victory , & c.,  victory,  i.e.,  the  victor,  the  conqueror. 
The  victory  then  is  the  cause  of  victory,  the  arms  by  which  the  victory 
is  obtained,  i .e.  faith.  This  victorious  faith  is  not  naked  and  idle 
faith,  but  clothed  with  charity  and  good  works,  struggling  and  fight- 
ing bravely,  according  to  the  words,  “ Who  through  faith  subdued 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


472  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  V. 


kingdoms,  wrought  righteousness/'  &c.  (Heb.  xi.)  And  as  S.  Paul 
says  ( Eph . vi.  16),  “And  in  all  taking  the  shield  of  faith  by  which 
ye  can  quench  all  the  fiery  darts  of  the  most  wicked  one.”  For 
overcomes  the  Greek  has  vixfoaea,  aorist  overcame . By  this  all  time  is 
signified.  He  hath  overcome , he  overcomes , and  shall  overcome.  So  S. 
Augustine  teaches  that  the  faith  of  Christ  has  subdued  the  whole 
world  to  itself  by  the  sanctity,  chastity,  patience,  constancy,  of  the 
Apostles,  Virgins,  and  Martyrs,  by  whom  the  nations  of  the  whole 
world  have  been  converted  to  Christ.  And  as  he  saith  again  (Ser. 
i de  Verb . Apost .),  “ There  are  no  greater  riches,  or  treasures,  no 
substance  of  this  world  greater  than  the  Catholic  Faith.  It  saves 
sinful  man,  gives  sight  to  the  blind,  heals  the  sick,  baptizes  cate- 
chumens, restores  the  penitent,  helps  the  just,  crowns  the  martyrs.” 
And  S.  Bernard  says,  “ Faith  reaches  things  inaccessible,  discovers 
the  unknown,  comprehends  the  infinite,  seizes  the  remotest  bounds 
of  things,  and  in  short  embraces  eternity  itself  in  its  own  most 
spacious  bosom.  I would  say  boldly  that  the  eternal  and  Blessed 
Trinity,  whom  I cannot  understand,  I believe  in  and  hold  firmly  by 
faith,  a thing  which  I am  not  capable  of  by  mere  soundness  of 
intellect. 

Ver.  5. — Who  is  he  that  overcometh  the  world, , &c.  For  by  be- 
lieving he  hopes,  by  hoping  he  invokes,  by  invoking  he  loves  Christ, 
and  therefore  he  is  strengthened  by  the  grace  of  Christ  to  despise 
the  world,  and  by  despising  he  overcomes  it,  according  to  the  say- 
ing of  S.  Paul,  “ I am  able  to  do  all  things  in  Him  who  strengtheneth 
me.”  For  he  who  believes  in  Christ,  ought  to  follow  the  precepts 
of  Christ  and  obey  Him,  not  the  world. 

S.  John  proves  his  thesis  ex  hypothesis  the  general  from  the  par- 
ticular. He  proves,  I say,  that  faith  is  the  victory  of  believers, 
because  the  faith  of  Christ  is  the  victory  over  the  world.  And  at 
the  same  time  he  confutes  Cerinthus,  Ebion,  and  the  other  heretics 
of  that  age,  who  denied  the  Divinity  of  Christ.  Hence  when  Peter 
confessed  this  doctrine,  saying,  “ Thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of 
the  Living  God,”  he  deserved  to  hear  from  Him,  “ Thou  art  Peter, 
and  upon  this  rock  I will  build  My  Church.” 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


CHRIST’S  BODY  AND  BLOOD. 


473 


Ver.  6. — This  is  He  who  cometh  by  water  and  bloody  Jesus  Christ . 
This  is  Messias,  the  Son  of  God,  the  Saviour  and  Redeemer  of  the 
world,  whom  the  Prophets  foretold  should  come  to  redeem  the  world 
by  His  Blood,  and  purify  it  by  the  water  of  baptism,  as  is  plain  from 
Ezek.  xxxvi.  47,  and  Zech.  xii.  13.  John  proves  that  Jesus  Christ 
is  the  Son  of  God;  that  is,  that  Jesus  is  true  Man  and  true  God. 
He  does  this,  1st.  Because  He  is  He  who  came,  Greek,  6 
t’.e.y  He>  the  Coming  One , the  Messias,  who  indeed  the  Prophets 
promised  should  come : whom  the  Scripture  (Isa.  ix.  6.  and  else- 
where) signified  should  be  God  and  the  Son  of  God.  Wherefore 
Coming  or  About  to  come  is  the  Name  of  Messiah.  For  so  the  Jews 
called  Him  from  the  prophetic  oracles.  This  is  plain  from  S.  John 
i.  15,  &c. 

Again,  he  proves  the  same  thing  from  the  water  and  the  blood 
of  which  the  Body  of  Christ  was  constituted,  and  which  He  shed  for 
us.  For  they  signify,  1st.  That  Christ  was  a true  man,  and  not  a 
phantasm,  as  Simon  Magus  and  Manes  pretended.  For  the  human 
body  is  composed  of  water  and  blood. 

2d.  The  water  and  blood  proved  that  Christ  is  true  God.  One 
reason  is  that  the  Blood  of  Christ  was  the  full  price  of  our  redemp- 
tion, entirely  satisfying  God  for  the  offences  of  our  sins.  Therefore 
it  was  necessary  that  the  Blood  should  be  the  Blood  of  a God-man, 
a man  hypostatically  united  to  God  : for  the  blood  of  a mere  man 
could  not  be  an  adequate  price  for  offences  against  God.  A second 
reason  is,  because  Christ  by  the  virtue  of  His  Blood  in  ordaining 
baptism,  endowed  it  with  a Divine  power  to  expiate  all  the  sins  of 
all  men.  Therefore  it  was  necessary  for  Him  to  be  God.  For 
Christ  did  this  per  se,  and  authoritatively,  not  ministerially  as  depen- 
dent upon  some  one  else.  But  per  se  to  institute  a sacrament  to 
remit  and  atone  for  sin  is  a work  of  Divine  power. 

There  is  an  allusion  in  the  first  place  to  the  water  and  blood  of 
the  victims  with  which  Moses  ratified  the  Old  Testament  (Ex.  xxiv. 
8).  By  this  he  signified  that  Christ  by  His  own  Blood  and  Water 
would  ratify  the  New  Testament.  Hear  S.  Paul,  Heb.  ix.  19,  “For 
when  Moses  had  spoken  every  precept  to  all  the  people  according 


Digitized  by 


Google 


474  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  V. 


to  the  law,  he  took  the  blood  of  calves  and  of  goats,  with  water,  and 
scarlet  wool,  and  hyssop,”  &c. 

There  is  an  allusion,  secondly,  to  the  water  and  blood  which 
miraculously  flowed  from  the  side  of  Christ  when  He  was  dead  upon 
the  Cross.  For  a dead  body,  instead  of  the  blood  and  water  of  a 
living  one,  naturally  emits  gore  (saniem).  S.  John  alone  of  the 
Evangelists  records  this  emission  of  blood  and  water.  By  these  two 
it  was  set  forth  that  by  the  power  of  the  blood  of  Christ  the  faithful 
should  be  cleansed  from  their  sins  by  the  water  of  Baptism.  And  this 
is  the  meaning  of  the  Bride,  i.e.  the  Church,  when  she  says  (Cant.  5. 
10),  “ My  Beloved  is  white  and  ruddy.”  (So  Cyril,  Hicros.  Cat  13  ; 
S.  Augustine,  lib . 2 de  Catech.  rud.  c.  6 ; S.  Leo,  Epist.  45,  Hier.  83 ; 
Damascene,  4 de  Fide , c.  10;  Suarez,  3 part . qucest.  53,  disput.  41,  and 
others.)  From  hence  our  Salmeron  is  of  opinion  that  Christ  always 
mingled  water  with  His  Blood,  viz.,  tears  at  His  circumcision,  His 
Bloody  Sweat,  His  Scourging,  and  on  the  Cross  before  His  death. 
And  that  this  was  why  He  ordered  water  to  be  mingled  with  wine 
in  the  Eucharistic  Chalice  to  be  converted  into  His  Blood. 

Moreover,  S.  John  distinguishes  Christ's  Baptism  from  that  of  John 
the  Baptist,  because  the  latter  was  in  water  only,  and,  therefore  un- 
availing for  the  remission  of  sins.  But  Christ's  Baptism  was  in  water 
and  blood,  and  therefore  availing  to  that  end.  Again,  he  confutes  the 
Ebionites,  who  thought  that  God  was  appeased  with  mere  water,  and 
who  therefore  washed  themselves  daily  with  water,  and  offered  water 
only,  without  wine,  in  the  Eucharistic  Chalice,  because  they  denied 
that  we  were  redeemed  by  the  Blood  of  Christ.  (See  Irenaeus, 
lib.  s e.  1.) 

Lastly,  Tertullian  (lib.  de  Bapt.  e.  16)  says,  Christ  came  by  water 
when  he  was  baptized  by  John,  by  blood  when  He  suffered,  that 
“ He  might  be  washed  by  water,  glorified  by  blood,”  by  the  victory  of 
His  Passion  and  Death.  “ He  would  have  us  called  by  water, 
elected  by  blood.  This  twofold  Baptism  He  shed  forth  from  the 
wound  in  His  pierced  side,  that  they  who  believed  in  His  Blood 
might  be  washed  with  water,  and  that  those  who  were  laved  with  the 
water  of  Baptism  might  also  drink  His  Blood  in  the  Eucharist” 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  SPIRIT  IS  THE  TRUTH. 


475 


Tropologically,  S.  Bernard  explains  it  to  mean  a twofold  baptism 
and  a twofold  martyrdom : ist,  Of  compunction  by  tears ; 2nd,  By 
the  desire  of  mortification.  “Now  because  we  have  said  that 
baptism  is  signified  by  water,  martyrdom  by  blood,  remember  that 
there  is  one  only  and  daily  baptism,  one  only  and  daily  martyrdom. 
For  there  is  indeed  a kind  of  martyrdom  and  a certain  effusion  of 
blood  in  the  daily  affliction  of  the  body.  There  is  also  a species  of 
baptism  in  compunction  of  the  heart  and  frequent  tears.” 

Ver.  6. — This  is  He  who  cometh  by  water  and  blood.  Some  Greek 
codices  add  xai  imbfiaros,  i.e.  and  by  spirit:  not  by  water  only , but  by 
water  and  blood,  and  by  spirit. 

And  the  Spirit  it  is  which  testifies  that  Christ  is  Truth.  ( Vulg :) 
The  Greek  has  in  rb  icnitfia  Unv  r\  aXrjQua,  i.e.,  The  Spirit  is  the 
Truth.  This  is  also  the  reading  of  the  Syriac.  The  meaning  is, 
It  is  the  Spirit  who  recently  at  Pentecost  testified  that  Christ  is  the 
Son  of  God.  Him  therefore  we  must  believe  because  He  is  the 
Spirit  of  Truth,  and  the  Truth  Itself.  But  the  genuine  reading 
is,  Because  Christ  is  Truth.  For  the  Apostle  is  here  treating  of 
Christ,  and  Christ’s  proper  name  is  the  Truth. 

To  the  obscure  and  as  it  were  dead  testimony  of  water  and  blood, 
is  added  the  clear  and  living  witness  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  For  He 
as  well  during  Christ’s  (earthly)  life,  in  which  He  wrought  miracles 
by  Him  to  bear  witness  to  this,  as  also  after  His  death  and 
resurrection,  when  He  was  sent  by  Him  to  the  Apostles  at  Pentecost, 
testified  by  their  mouth,  and  preached  everywhere  that  Christ  was 
the  Truth,  i.e.  true  God.  For  Christ,  in  that  He  is  God  is  the 
Word,  and  therefore  the  Truth  and  Wisdom  of  the  Father.  In  that 
He  is  man,  He  is  the  true  ambassador  and  interpreter  of  the  Father, 
who  opened  out  the  shadows  of  the  Old  Law,  and  published  the  true 
doctrine  concerning  God,  according  to  His  own  words,  “ I am  the 
way,  the  truth,  and  the  life.”  Hence  too  the  Aaronic  High  Priest 
bore,  as  a type  of  Christ  the  true  and  real  High  Priest,  the  Urim  and 
Thummim,  i.e.  doctrine  and  truth,  in  his  breastplate. 

Ver.  7. — Because  there  are  Three  which  bear  witness  in  Heaven, 
&c.  S.  John  here  more  fully  explains  and  confirms  the  testimony 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


4 76  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  V. 

already  adduced  of  the  water,  the  blood  and  the  spirit  concerning 
Christ.  The  particle  because  is  partly  confirmatory  of  what  He  had 
said  in  the  5th  ver.  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,  partly  of  what  he 
said  in  the  6th,  that  the  Spirit  bears  witness  that  Jesus  is  true  God. 
For  this  is  here  confirmed  because  the  Holy  Spirit  is  one  of  the 
three  witnesses  who  in  heaven  bear  testimony  to  Christ 

S.  Jerome  (Prrf.  in  Epist . Canon.)  observes  that  this  verse  had 
been  erased  by  unbelievers,  i.e.  the  Arians,  from  some  Greek  copies. 
Therefore  it  is  not  found  in  the  Syriac,  Clement  of  Alexandria,  Bede, 
GEcumenius,  and  some  others.  It  is,  however,  the  constant  reading 
of  the  Latin  Bibles,  and  the  more  correct  Greek  MSS.  and  of  many 
of  the  ancients,  SS.  Athanasius,  Augustine,  Jerome,  Cyprian,  the 
Lateran  Council,  at  which  Greeks  were  present  Therefore  it  is 
certain  that  these  words  are  to  be  taken  as  canonical  Scripture. 

The  meaning  then  is  this — All  the  Three  Persons  of  the  Sacred 
Trinity  in  heaven  and  from  heaven  bear  testimony  to  the  angels, 
but  especially  to  men  (for  to  men  S.  John  chiefly  refers)  concerning 
Christ,  that  He  is  the  true  Messiah  and  the  Son  of  God.  This  the 
Father  did  at  His  Baptism  and  Transfiguration.  Again,  when  He 
answered  Christ  by  thunder  out  of  heaven,  “ I have  both  glorified, 
and  will  glorify  Thee  again  ’*  (/no.  xii.  18).  Similarly  also  the  Holy 
Ghost  bore  witness  when  He  descended  upon  Christ  in  the  form 
of  a dove,  and  poured  out  Himself  upon  the  Apostles  and  other 
Christians  at  Pentecost.  And  this  was  the  result  of  Christ’s  pre- 
• diction,  promise,  and  mission.  Wherefore  the  same  Holy  Spirit  by 
the  mouths  of  the  Apostles  preached  little  else  save  Christ  The 
Son  also  very  often  declared,  taught,  and  proved  convincingly  by 
His  miracles  that  He  was  the  Messias  and  the  Son  of  God,  as  is 
plain  from  the  whole  Gospel  of  S.  John.  Therefore  heaven  and 
earth  mutually  agree,  yea  the  whole  universe  appears  at  one,  in 
bearing  this  witness  to  Christ. 

And  these  Three  are  One — as  in  nature  and  Divine  Essence,  so 
likewise  in  intelligence,  voice,  and  testimony,  concerning  Christ. 
For  ail  these  things  in  the  Holy  Trinity  are  one  and  the  same. 
There  is  another  reading  of  these  words  in  the  Greek,  signifying 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  THREE  WITNESSES. 


477 


These  Three  are  into  One  (in  unum),  but  the  Latin  and  other  Greek 
copies  have  These  Three  are  One  (Hi  tres  unum  sunt),  signifying  the 
oneness  of  Substance  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  that  the  Three  Persons 
have  one  and  the  same  undivided  Godhead. 

Ver.  8. — And  there  are  three  which  give  witness  in  earth , the  Spirit , 
the  water,  and  the  blood . Three  (tres  in  the  masc .).  He  might  have 
said  tria  in  the  neuter,  for  the  Greek  wtZfia,  udus,  al/ia,  are  all  in 
that  gender.  But  he  chose  to  say  tres,  to  show  that  these  three 
earthly  witnesses  concur  with,  yea  represent,  the  Three  Heavenly  wit- 
nesses already  spoken  of.  So  says  S.  Augustine.  By  a figure  of  speech, 
personality  is  attributed  to  these  earthly  witnesses,  as  speaking  with 
man’s  voice.  S.  John  sets  the  human  and  earthly  testimony  over 
against  the  Divine.  Some  think  that  the  Three  Witnesses  in  heaven 
are  witnesses  to  Christ’s  Divinity,  and  the  three  on  earth  witnesses 
to  His  Humanity.  Among  these  are  Innocent  III.  (cap.  in  quad  de 
Celebrat.  Miss.),  and  S.  Thomas.  But  it  is  better  to  take  both 
classes  as  attesting  the  Divinity.  For  this  is  what  S.  John  undertook 
to  prove  (ver.  5),  because  Cerinthus  and  others  denied  it.  And 
this  is  why  he  subjoins  presently,  He  that  believeth  in  the  Son  of  God 
hath  the  witness  of  God  in  himself. 

There  are  Three.  S.  John  places  a twofold  Trinity  of  witnesses 
to  Christ,  who  testify  of  His  Divinity,  and  that  He  is  the  Son  of 
God.  And  he  sets  the  one  over  against  the  other.  Indeed,  he 
unites  them  as  regards  their  office  of  witness-bearing.  The  first  are 
uncreated,  viz.,  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Ghost.  The  second 
are  created,  the  Spirit,  the  water,  and  the  blood.  These  emanate 
from  the  uncreated  witnesses,  and  correspond  to  them.  For  water 
refers  to  the  Father,  blood  to  the  Son,  spirit  to  the  Holy  Ghost. 
For  the  Father  is  the  beginning  (principium ) of  all  things,  as  like- 
wise is  water.  For  out  of  water  were  formed  the  heavens,  the  air, 
the  birds  and  the  fishes,  as  I have  shown  in  the  beginning  of 
Genesis.  Again,  water  nourishes  herbs,  trees,  plants,  and  every 
living  thing.  Wherefore,  also,  the  heavens  are  called  in  Hebrew 
scam  aim,  i.e.  waters.  Again,  water  signifies  the  affluence  of  goods 
and  graces  which  there  is  in  God  the  Father,  according  to  the  words 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


478  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  V. 


in  Is.  xii.,  “Ye  shall  draw  water  with  joy  from  the  wells  of  the 
Saviour.”  ( Vulg.)  It  is  well  known  that  the  Egyptians  worshipped 
the  Nile  as  a god,  because  all  their  crops  were  due  to  the  over- 
flowing of  the  Nile.  Moreover,  water  appositely  represents  the 
mercy  and  goodness  of  God  the  Father.  At  the  present  day  some 
of  the  Indians  adore  water.  Suidas,  under  the  word  Brachmans , 
says  that  the  Brahmins  lived  to  a very  great  age  because  they  drank 
nothing  but  water.  Apollonias  of  Syana  was  wont  to  say  that  those 
who  drink  water  never  suffer  from  giddiness  in  the  head. 

On  earth — from  earth  : like  as  the  first  Three  testify  in  heaven , 
i.e.  from  heaven,  to  men  dwelling  on  earth. 

The  Spirit , the  water,  and  the  blood — the  spirit,  namely,  which 
Christ  when  dying  on  the  Cross  committed  into  the  hands  of  the 
Father.  Also  the  water  and  the  blood  which  flowed  from  the  side 
of  Christ  testify  that  Christ  was  truly  not  only  man,  but  God,  because 
by  these,  as  by  a just  price,  Christ  made  satisfaction  to  an  offended 
God.  Again,  His  spirit,  because  it  went  forth  with  a loud  cry, 
showed  Him  to  be  God.  Wherefore  the  centurion,  when  he  saw 
that  He  thus  cried  out  and  expired,  said,  “ Truly  this  man  was  the 
Son  of  God.”  For  speech  fails  those  who  are  at  the  point  of  death. 
This  cry  of  Christ  was  then  miraculous  and  not  natural,  signifying 
that  Christ  was  more  than  human,  and  therefore  that  He  died  of 
His  own  will,  and  not  through  weakness. 

2d.  S.  Augustine  Lyra  and  the  Gloss  understand  by  the  Spirit  in 
this  place  the  Holy  Ghost  shed  forth  at  Pentecost.  For  He  testi- 
fied that  Christ  was  God. 

3d.  CEcumenius  understands  by  Spirit  the  Holy  Ghost  given  at 
Baptism.  “ In  Baptism,”  he  says,  “ by  water  Jesus  Christ  was 
declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  by  the  witness  of  the  Father.” 

Anagogically,  but  very  appropriately,  and  almost  literally,  the 
water,  the  blood,  and  the  spirit  that  were  emitted  by  Christ  upon  the 
Cross,  but  resumed  by  Him  at  His  resurrection,  signify  that  He  was 
the  very  promised  Messiah,  the  conqueror  of  death  and  hell,  and 
therefore  the  Son  of  God.  For  Christ  rose  again  by  His  own  power, 
and  resumed  these  three  things. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


WHAT  THE  SPIRIT,  WATER,  AND  BLOOD  SIGNIFY.  479 

Mystically,  by  spirit,  water,  and  blood  are  signified  the  three  things 
which  concur  for  our  justification.  As  S.  Ambrose  says,  “ By  the 
Spirit  our  mind  is  renewed,  by  water  we  are  washed ; the  blood  is 
the  price.” 

Allegorically,  by  these  three  things  are  signified  the  three  chief 
sacraments  which  bear  testimony  to  Christ,  as  instituted  by  Him,  and 
as  sanctifying  by  virtue  of  His  merits.  Water  signifies  Baptism, 
blood  the  Eucharistic  Chalice,  the  Spirit  penance.  Whence  by 
breathing  the  Spirit  upon  His  Apostles  Christ  gave  them  the  power  of 
remitting  sins. 

Symbolically,  Baldwin  of  Canterbury,  whose  work  I examined  in 
manuscript  at  Louvain  (lib.  1 de  Eucharist , c.  48)  says,  “ The  spirit  of 
the  righteous,  the  tears  of  penitents,  the  blood  of  the  martyrs  bear 
witness  that  Christ  is  the  Redeemer.” 

S.  Augustine  upon  this  passage  thinks  that  by  these  three  earthly 
witnesses  the  Three  Persons  of  the  Holy  Trinity  are  denoted,  viz., 
the  Father  by  the  spirit,  the  Son  by  the  the  blood \ the  Holy  Ghost 
by  the  water . For  of  the  Father  it  is  said,  " God  is  a Spirit  ” {/no.  iv. 
14),  the  Son  assumed  the  blood  and  flesh  of  man’s  nature.  Of  the 
Holy  Ghost  it  is  spoken : “ Out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  rivers  of 
living  water.”  (/no.  vii.  18.)  And  for  this  reason  they  are  called  tres 
in  the  masculine,  not  tria,  three  things , in  the  neuter. 

Tropologically,  S.  Bernard  (Serm.  2 in  Oct.  Pasch.)  says,  “By  the 
bloody  the  watery  and  the  spirit  thou  hast  witness  unto  righteousness > 
that  thou  art  born  again  through  Christ,  if  thou  refrainest  from  sin, 
if  thou  bringest  forth  worthy  fruits  of  penance,  if  thou  doest  living 
works.”  The  blood  there  signifies  continence,  the  water  tears,  the 
Spirit  spirit,  and  works  which  testify  that  we  are  regenerated  and 
made  holy.  “ He  also  shows  that  these  three  things  are  opposed  to 
three  things  which  are  in  the  world,  and  overcome  them.  For  the 
concupiscence  of  the  flesh  is  overcome  by  the  mortification  of  the 
blood,  the  lust  of  the  eyes  by  the  compunction  of  tears,  the  pride  of 
life,  or  the  spirit  of  vanity,  by  the  spirit  of  charity.”  S.  Bernard  adds 
(Serm.  76)  that  there  are  in  like  manner  three  witnesses  in  hell,  the 
worm  by  which  the  conscience  is  gnawed,  the  fire  which  burns 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


480  first  epistle  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  V. 

both  soul  and  body,  and  the  spirit  of  despair.  “ By  the  witnesses 
in  heaven,”  he  says,  “ is  given  the  witness  of  beatitude,  by  those 
in  earth  of  justification,  by  those  in  hell  of  damnation.  The 
first  testimony  is  of  glory,  the  second  of  grace,  the  third  of 
wrath.” 

And  these  three  are  one.  Some  Greek  and  Latin  codices,  as  the 
Complutensian  and  the  Royal,  omit  these  words.  Wherefore  S. 
Thomas  ( Opusc . 24  in  2 decret.)  says,  that  they  were  foisted  in  by  the 
Arians,  that  it  might  be  gathered  that  the  Three  heavenly  Persons 
are  not  spoken  of  as  being  one  in  Essence,  but  only  as  bearing 
witness.  But  many  of  the  Latin  and  the  more  correct  Greek  copies 
have  the  words,  but  read,  These  three  are  into  one  (in  unum ).  And 
the  Syriac,  These  three  are  in  one  (in  uno),  meaning  to  say,  the  water, 
the  blood,  and  the  spirit  of  Christ  are  not  one  as  the  Father,  the  Son, 
and  the  Holy  Ghost  are  One,  but  that  they  are  referred  to  One,  &c., 
Christ  and  His  Humanity,  or  mystically  to  one  justifying  and  per- 
fecting of  man. 

Ver.  9. — If  we  receive  the  witness  of  men,  &c.  If  we  give  credit  to 
man’s  testimony,  much  more  ought  we  to  believe  the  witness  of  God 
concerning  Christ.  It  is  greater  both  in  dignity  and  authority,  in 
truth  and  certainty.  For  God  infinitely  surpasses  all  men  and 
angels  in  majesty  and  veracity.  He  is  the  first  and  supreme  Verity, 
who  cannot  lie,  neither  can  He  deceive,  or  be  deceived.  As  S. 
Paul  declares  (Rom.  iii.  4),  “ Let  God  be  true,  and  every  man  a 
liar.”  Moreover,  the  testimony  of  the  Church,  of  the  Apostles  and 
Prophets,  is  the  testimony  of  God,  for  the  Church  is  governed  by  the 
Holy  Ghost,  who  is  the  Spirit  of  Truth. 

Because  this  is  the  witness  of  God , &c.  The  word  because  here  is 
not  so  much  causative  as  explanatory,  and  means  the  same  as  but 
The  meaning  is,  But  this  is  Gods  testimony , because,  i.e.  which , He 
has  testified,  &c.,  namely,  as  He  testified  at  the  Baptism  of  Christ, 
and  at  many  other  times,  “ This  is  My  Beloved  Son.” 

Ver.  10. — He  that  believeth  in  the  Son  of  God  hath  the  witness  in 
himself  1st.  Because  he  hath  in  him  the  thing  attested  by  God, 
namely  this  truth,  that  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  TESTIMONY  OF  FAITH.  48 1 

2d.  Because  he  hath  in  himself  the  very  witness  of  God,  and  God 
Himself  attesting. 

3d.  This  testimony  is  the  faith  itself  by  which  we  believe  the 
witness  of  God.  There  is  a metonymy,  because  the  object  is  put 
instead  of  the  habit,  or  act  tending  to  the  object.  It  means,  he  who 
believes  has  a special  gift  of  God,  viz  , faith.  And  this  includes  the 
witness,  or  testimony  of  God,  and  God  Himself  attests,  which 
marvellously  honours  the  believer,  and  makes  him  strong  to  confess 
Christ. 

4th.  This  testimony  may  be  taken  to  signify  the  regeneration  and 
adoption,  the  grace  and  glory  of  the  believer — meaning,  He  who 
believes  in  the  Son  of  God  hath  in  himself  the  witness  of  God, 
namely,  that  by  which  God  witnesses  to  his  soul  and  conscience  by 
means  of  this  faith  with  which  he  believes  in  Christ,  that  he  is 
faithful,  and  a son  and  heir  of  God. 

He  that  believeth  not  the  Son , &c.  As  he  that  believeth  in  the 
Son,  and  receives  God's  testimony  concerning  Him,  makes  God  to 
be  true,  and  honours  and  worships  Him ; so,  on  the  contrary,  he  that 
believeth  not  the  Son,  and  rejects  God's  testimony  concerning  Him, 
makes  God  false,  and  does  Him  great  despite. 

Observe:  instead  of  believe , the  Greek  has  hht/otuxi*,  hath 
believed . This  is  a Hebraism  by  which  the  perfect  is  put  for  any 
tense. 

Ver.  11. — And  this  is  the  testimony , &c.  This  means,  1st.  God 
hath  not  only  testified  that  Christ  is  His  Son,  but  also  that  He  is 
our  Saviour  and  Redeemer,  so  that  he  who  believes  in  Him  is 
justified,  and  receives  the  spiritual  life  of  grace  and  glory. 

2d.  This  very  thing  is  the  end  and  fruit  of  the  testimony,  i.e.  of 
the  faith  by  which  we  believe  God's  witness  concerning  Christ,  that 
by  this  faith  we  obtain  the  life  of  grace  and  glory.  There  is  an 
allusion  and  reference  to  the  words  of  the  Gospel  (xvii.  3),  “ This  is 
life  eternal,  that  they  may  know  Thee  the  only  true  God  and  Jesus 
Christ  whom  Thou  hast  sent" 

Hath  given  to  us  eternal  life . By  these  words  hath  given,  S.  John 

denotes  the  firmness  and  certainty  both  of  the  Divine  promise  and 
you  Vf  2 h 


Digitized  by 


Google 


482  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  IOHN,  C.  V. 

of  our  hope,  namely,  that  we  are  just  as  sure  of  everlasting  life,  if 
persevere  in  faith  and  obedience,  as  if  it  had  been  actually  now 
bestowed  upon  us. 

The  primitive  Christians  represented  this  faith  and  hope  of  life 
eternal  by  the  Phoenix,  which  after  death  is  said  to  be  born  again 
and  rise  up  in  a fresh  and  youthful  life,  as  Lactantius  testifies  in  his 
poem  on  the  Phoenix.  Therefore  it  was  often  depicted  on  the  tombs 
of  the  faithful.  S.  Cecilia,  as  the  Acts  relate,  ordered  it  to  be  sculp- 
tured on  the  sarcophagus  of  S.  Maximus  the  Martyr.  So  too  at 
Rome  the  Phoenix  is  often  found  depicted  on  tombs  in  the  cata- 
combs. For  Christ  rising  again  to  life  eternal  is  our  Phoenix.  And 
He  by  raising  up  Christians  to  the  same  life,  will  make  them 
phoenixes  likewise. 

Ver.  12. — He  that  hath  the  Son , i.e,  by  faith,  love,  and  obedience, 
hath  life , — of  grace  in  fact,  of  glory  in  hope.  He  alludes  to  the 
words  in  his  own  Gospel,  “ He  that  believeth  in  the  Son  hath  ever- 
lasting life,  but  he  that  believeth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see  life,  but 
the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him.”  (iii.  35.) 

Ver.  13. — These  things  I write  unto  you,  that  ye  who  believe  in  the 
name  of  the  Son  of  God  have  eternal  life.  The  Greek  adds,  that  ye 
may  believe  in  the  name  of  the  Son  of  God . But  this  seems  to  be 
tautologous.  The  name  of  the  Son  of  God  is  put  for  the  thing  signi- 
fied, the  Son  of  God  Himself.  There  is  an  allusion  to  his  own 
Gospel  (xx.  31):  “These  things  are  written  that  ye  may  believe 

that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,  and  that  believing  ye  may  have  life  in 
His  name.” 

S.  John  here  reckons  up  three  fruits  of  a living  faith  in  Christ. 
The  first,  life  eternal  in  this  verse ; the  second,  confidence  of  obtain- 
ing all  things  from  God  (ver.  14) ; the  third  is  complete  banishment 
of  sin,  and  moral  sinlessness  (ver.  18). 

Ver.  14. — And  this  is  the  confidence , &c.  Truly  says  S.  Augustine, 
“ Whatsoever  we  ask  unprofitable  for  our  salvation  we  do  not  ask  in 
the  name  of  the  Saviour.” 

And  we  know : the  Greek  adds  ehv,  i.e.  if  This  makes  the 
words  of  the  verse  more  connected  : And  if  we  know  that  He  heareth 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  SIN  UNTO  DEATH.  483 

us,  whatsoever  we  shall  ask , we  know  that  we  have  the  petitions  which 
we  have  asked  of  Him. 

Ver.  16. — He  who  knows  his  brother  to  sin  a sin  not  unto  deaths  let 
him  ask,  and  life  shall  be  given  him  for  him  that  sinneth  not  unto  death. 
(S.  Ambrose,  lib.  1 de  Penitent  c.  9,  and  Tertullian,  de  Pudicit  c.  a, 
read,  because  he  sinneth  not  to  death.)  There  is  a sin  unto  death.  See. 
Instead  of  1 do  not  say , S.  Augustine  reads  in  this  place,  non  free- 
cipio,  1 do  not  command.  He  means,  If  any  one  knows  his  brother  to 
commit  any  sin,  let  him  pray  for  him,  and  God  will  give  him  repentance 
and  forgiveness.  I except,  however,  the  sin  unto  death.  If  any  one 
sins  a sin  unto  death,  I dare  not  promise,  nor  have  any  certain  hope, 
that  thou  wilt  obtain  pardon  for  him.  Yet  I do  not  altogether  forbid 
prayer  in  such  a case.  Pray  if  thou  wilt,  but  with  a doubt  of  obtaining. 

You  will  ask,  what  is  the  sin  unto  death  ? 1st.  Tertullian  (de  pudicit. 
caps . 2 and  19)  is  of  opinion  from  this  passage  that  there  are  some 
sins,  like  those  of  the  devils  while  they  were  yet  in  a state  of  proba- 
tion, so  deadly  that  they  are  absolutely  irremissible  in  this  life.  Such 
a sin  was  adultery  after  baptism.  But  this  is  an  error  condemned  in 
Scripture  and  the  Lateran  Council  under  Innocent  III. 

2d.  Origen  thinks  it  is  a sin  which  leads  to  destruction,  and  drags 
down  to  hell. 

3d.  Surrianus  (lib.  4 pro  Epist.  Pont.  c.  3)  thinks  it  is  a sin 
which  insolves  excommunication.  For  an  excommunicate  person  is 
impenitent  And  it  is  not  lawful  to  pray  for  one  excommunicate  in 
the  public  prayers  of  the  Church.  But  S.  John  is  speaking  of  any 
kind  of  prayer,  even  in  private. 

4th.  S.  Augustine  (lib.  1 in  Serm.  Dorn.)  thought  it  was  the  sin  of 
envy,  by  which  any  one  envies  his  brother's  grace,  virtue,  and  salvation. 
But  this  opinion  S.  Augustine  afterwards  modified  and  retracted. 

5th.  The  same  S.  Augustine  (lib.  de  corrept.  et  grat.  c.  12)  and 
many  others  think  it  is  the  sin  in  which  any  one  perseveres  unto 
death.  Lorinus  thinks  that  it  is  the  sin  of  hatred  and  murder. 
Others  think  it  means  the  sins  of  the  reprobate,  and  of  those  who 
will  be  damned.  But  it  is  uncertain  who  and  what  those  are.  Yet 
S.  John  says,  he  who  knows  his  brother  sin  a sin  not  unto  death. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


484  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  V. 

6th.  The  Gloss  supposes  it  to  be  a mortal  sin.  For  to  pray  for 
such  sins  is  the  duty  ex  officio , so  to  say,  of  the  Priest  alone.  But 
for  venial  sins  any  layman  whatever  may  pray.  But  what  S.  John 
says  is  opposed  to  this,  For  he  intimates  that  he  is  speaking, 
not  of  venial,  but  of  mortal  sins,  and  subjoins,  “ life  shall  be  given 
him." 

7th.  S.  Jerome  (in  cap.  14  Jerem.)  thinks  it  is  some  very  grave  sin 
which  God  has  determined  to  punish.  “ For  he  who  once,”  saith 
he,  “hath  been  devoted  to  the  sword,  or  famine,  or  pestilence,  cannot 
be  delivered  by  any  prayers.  Wherefore  it  was  said  to  the  Prophet 
that  he  should  not  ask  in  vain  what  he  could  not  obtain.” 

8th.  Dionysius  thinks  it  is  the  sin  of  final  impenitence.  Where- 
fore the  Bishop  of  Rochester  (Art.  17  cont.  Luther)  proves  the 
doctrine  of  Purgatory  from  this  passage.  For  S.  John  says  we  are 
to  pray  for  those  who  are  not  finally  impenitent,  that  is,  who  depart 
in  a state  of  justification  or  repentance.  And  this  surely  implies 
prayer  that  they  be  delivered  from  Purgatory. 

9th.  Anastasius  Niceenus  thinks  it  is  a sin  against  God,  such  as 
blasphemy,  concerning  which  it  is  said  (1  Sam.  ii.  25),  “If  a man 
sin  against  God,  who  shall  pray  for  him  ? ” 

10th.  Gagneius  thinks  it  is  the  sin  of  apostasy  and  infidelity,  by 
which  any  one  falls  from  the  faith  into  heresy  or  idolatry. 

nth.  S.  Hilary  (in  Ps.  cxl.)  thinks  it  is  the  sin  which  any  one 
commits  of  set  purpose  and  malice. 

1 2th.  S.  Ambrose  thinks  (lib.  1 de  Pen.  c.  8)  it  is  every  very  grave 
sin  which  is  remitted  with  difficulty. 

Most  of  these  opinons  are  true,  and  partly  explain,  but  few  touch 
the  exact  point  of  the  difficulty. 

My  own  opinion  is,  that  the  sin  unto  death  is  every  very  grave  sin 
which,  either  on  account  of  its  enormity  or  long  habit,  obstinacy 
or  malice,  is  irremediable  according  to  the  ordinary  rule  of  grace 
which  God  gives.  Such  was  the  sin  of  Judas  in  betraying  Christ. 
It  was  sin  unto  death  because  of  its  enormity;  and  incorrigible, 
because  of  his  obstinate  persistence  in  it.  So  too  the  sin  of  the  Jews 
in  blasphemy  and  slaying  Christ  was  a sin  unto  death,  because  so 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  UNFORGIVEN  SIN. 


485 


heinous  and  persisted  in.  Therefore  the  sin  unto  death  is  a chronic 
and  irremediable  one,  the  pardon  of  which  is  despaired  of,  and 
which  so  provokes  the  wrath  of  God  that  the  ordinary  prayers  of  the 
saints  cannot  pacify  it,  and  one  therefore  which  with  absolute 
certainty  brings  the  sinner  to  the  destruction  of  hell,  unless  some 
especially  eminent  saint,  like  another  Moses,  obtains  for  him  from 
God  extraordinary  grace  and  forgiveness.  This  sin  unto  death  is 
as  if  a physician  was  summoned  to  a sick  man,  and  after  examining 
him  were  to  say,  I cannot  heal  him,  he  is  sick  unto  death,  the  vital 
parts  are  mortifying.  In  like  manner,  says  S.  John,  when  a Christian 
sees  a heretic  and  an  apostate,  let  him  say,  I should  not  dare  to  pray 
for  him,  he  is  sinning  unto  death.  His  vitality  is  gone.  He  casts 
away  faith,  which  is  the  principle  of  spiritual  life.  This  is  the  mind 
and  general  opinion  of  S.  Augustine  and  Jerome,  Origen,  Bernard, 
Bonaventura,  S.  Thomas,  and  many  others.  There  is  a reference 
to  the  words  of  Christ  to  the  Jews  (John  viil  21  and  24),  “ I go  away, 
and  ye  shall  seek  Me,  and  shall  die  in  your  sin.”  From  which 
passage  we  gather  that  though  the  sin  unto  death  be  of  various 
and  multiform  kinds,  as  impenitence,  obstinacy,  determination  to 
persevere  in  any  sin  until  death,  and  so  on,  yet  strictly  by  the  sin 
unto  death  S.  John  understands  and  intends  a sin  by  which  a 
Christian  departs  from  the  faith  and  Church  of  Christ,  and  mali- 
ciously attacks  them,  and  strives  to  draw  others  away  into  his  own 
heresy,  or  idolatry.  This  was  what  some  were  doing  in  S.  John’s 
time,  to  his  great  fear  and  grief  Wherefore,  in  order  to  deter 
the  faithful  from  being  led  away,  he  calls  such  persons  sinners  unto 
death. 

There  is  a reference  to  such  passages  as  Jer.  xvii.  1,  “The  sin  of 
Judah  is  written  with  an  iron  stylus , in  an  adamantine  nail,  it  is 
ploughed  deep  upon  the  breadth  of  their  heart”  ( Vulg.)  On  which 
verse  S.  Gregory  says,  “The  finger-nail  is  the  extremity  of  the 
body : but  the  diamond  is  so  hard  a stone  that  it  cannot  be  cut  with 
iron.  Now  by  the  iron  style  is  signified  the  strong  sentence,  but  by 
the  adamantine  nail  the  eternal  result  Therefore  the  sin  of  Judah 
is  said  to  be  written  with  an  iron  stylus  in  an  adamantine  nail, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


486  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  V. 


because  the  offence  of  the  Jews  by  the  strong  sentence  of  God  is 
reserved  for  an  eternal  end.” 

By  this  sin  a man  opposes  himself  directly  to  Christ,  from  whom  is 
the  only  hope  of  salvation.  He  drives  Him  from  him,  yea  he 
blasphemes  Him  by  whom  alone  he  can  be  healed.  So  the  disease 
is  said  to  be  incurable  which  does  not  admit  of  food  or  medicine. 
Whence  S.  Paul  saith  to  the  Hebrews  (vi.  4-6),  “ For  it  is  impossible 
for  those  who  were  once  enlightened,”  &c. 

From  what  has  been  said  it  is  plain  that  the  sin  unto  death  is 
distinguished  from  blasphemy  against  the  Spirit,  spoken  of  in  S. 
Matt  xii.  21,  although  it  is  akin  to  it  Christ  calls  the  sin  of  the 
Scribes  blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  because  they  ascribed 
His  Divine  works,  such  as  the  casting  out  devils,  which  He  did  by  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  an  unclean  spirit  And  they  did  this 
knowingly  and  maliciously,  because  they  might  and  ought  easily 
have  known  that  those  works  were  wrought  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
not  by  a devil.  Christ  opposes  such  blasphemy  against  the  Holy 
Spirit  of  God  to  blasphemy  against  the  Son  of  Man,  by  which  some 
who  were  offended  at  the  human  conversation  and  condescension  of 
Christ  caluminated  His  actions  as  man.  They  called  him  a wine- 
bibber,  a friend  of  publicans  and  sinners.  And  this  was  a less,  and 
therefore  more  easily  remissible,  sin.  But  as  the  sin  spoken  of  in  S. 
Matthew  was  the  blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  so  here  the  sin 
unto  death  is  blasphemy  and  treachery  against  Christ  And  both 
one  and  the  other  are  with  difficulty  remitted. 

This  sin  is  not  to  be  healed  by  any  one  but  by  Christ  alone.  For 
such  a sinner  is  like  unto  Lazarus,  of  whom  Martha  said  unto  Christ, 
“ Lord,  by  this  time  he  stinketh,  for  he  has  been  buried  four  days.” 
Wherefore  Jesus,  with  great  effort,  weeping  and  lifting  up  His  eyes  to 
heaven,  and  crying  with  a loud  voice,  “ Lazarus,  come  forth ! ” raiseth 
him  again  to  life. 

I do  not  say  that  any  one  should  pray  for  it.  Thus  the  Greek  and 
Latin.  S.  Gregory  has  a reading,  that  any  one  should  pray  for  him . 
The  meaning  is,  I do  not  forbid  prayer  for  such,  but  I dare  not 
promise  that  the  prayer  will  be  answered.  For  often  God  will 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


~4 


THOSE  WHO  AkE  BOkN  OF  GOD  SIN  NOT.  4^7 


not  hear  those  who  pray  on  behalf  of  the  sin  unto  death,  according 
to  the  words  in  Jeremiah,  vii.  16,  “ Pray  not  thou  for  this  people, 
for  I will  not  hear  thee.” 

S.  Bernard  says  (de  Grad.  Humil.  cap.  ult.\  “The  Apostle  John 
says,  for  such  a one  I do  not  say  that  any  one  should  pray.  But 
dost  thou  say,  O Apostle,  that  any  one  should  despair?  Indeed 
let  him  who  loves  him  groan.  Though  he  may  not  persume  to  pray, 
yet  let  him  weep.  Thus  Martha  and  the  Magdalen  wept  the  death 
of  Lazarus,  and  by  weeping  obtained  his  resurrection.” 

Ver.  1 7. — All  iniquity  is  sin , and  thtre  is  a sin  unto  death : the 
Greek  and  Syriac  add  the  negative  proposition,  and  there  is  a sin  not 
unto  death.  He  opposes  the  two  kinds  of  sin.  Every  iniquity 
is  sin,  but  not  every  iniquity  unto  death,  because  it  is  a peculiar 
kind  of  sin  which,  as  is  said,  is  sin  unto  death. 

For  iniquity  the  Greek  has  adixia,  injustice , which  is  properly 
opposed  to  justice.  But  as  in  Scripture,  so  also  in  Aristotle  and  the 
ethical  writers,  justice  is  taken  generally  for  any  virtue,  and  injustice 
or  iniquity  for  any  sin. 

Ver.  18. — We  know  that  every  one  who  is  born  of  God  sinneth  not, 
but  the  generation  of  God  preserveth  him.  The  Latin  translator 
reads,  ym<nq  ix  rov  ©10D  aMv.  The  present  Greek  reading  is 
ywriOtis  ix  rov  @1  ou  rripi  avrov,  i.e.  he  who  is  bom  of  God  keepeth 
himself,  viz.,  by  the  virtue  received  from  his  divine  birth. 

And  the  wicked  one  toucheth  him  not.  This  is  the  third  fruit  of  the 
living  faith,  or  regeneration,  by  which  any  one  through  faith  and 
grace  is  born  again  in  Christ,  viz.,  preservation  from  at  least  grave 
and  deadly  sin,  and  consequently  from  the  power  of  the  malignant 
one,  i.e.  the  devil.  I have  explained  this  in  cap.  3 vers.  6 and  9. 

Generation  is  here  put  for  the  grace  generating.  S.  Gregory  and 
S.  Bernard,  for  generation  of  God  read  heavenly  generation.  By 
generation  here  S.  Gregory  understands  knowledge  of  the  Divine 
will,  with  the  love  of  the  same ; S.  Bernard,  the  Divine  predestina- 
tion ; Didymus,  the  regeneration  of  the  will  which  takes  place  by 
voluntary  conversion  and  repentance.  But  others  better  understand 
it  to  mean  grace  and  charity.  For  by  these  are  wrought  the  re- 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


488  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  V. 

generation  and  renovation  of  the  new  man,  that  is  to  say,  of  the 
faithful  and  holy  soul,  and  its  continuance  in  charity. 

And  the  wicked  one  ( malignus ),  &c.  By  the  wicked  one  Didymus  and 
Thomas  English  understand  the  world.  But  others,  generally  with 
more  correctness,  understand  it  of  the  devil \ For  the  devil  is  more 
especially  the  wicked  or  the  evil  one.  He  does  not  touch,  i.e  does 
not  hurt,  him  who  is  bom  of  God.  The  Syriac  translates,  doth  not 
come  nigh  him.  This  is  what  is  said  in  Zach.  ii.  8,  “He  that 
toucheth  you  toucheth  the  apple  of  Mine  eye.”  And  Ps.  civ.  15, 
“Touch  not  My  Christs”  (Vulg.);  and  S.  Paul  says,  “God  is  faith- 
ful, who  will  not  suffer  you  to  be  tempted  above  that  ye  are  able.” 

Ver.  19. — We  know  that  we  are  of  God , and  the  whole  world  is 
placed  in  the  wicked  one.  For  is  placed  the  Greek  reads  xf/>a/,  i.e. 
lieth.  The  wicked  one  (malignus]  f i.e  the  devil,  as  in  the  last  verse. 
This  is  the  epilogue  of  the  Epistles.  As  though  S.  John  said,  This 
is  the  conclusion  and  the  sum  of  my  words.  We  ought  greatly  to 
rejoice  that,  being  born  of  God,  we  live  and  abide  in  Him,  and  lead 
in  Him  a pure  and  holy  and  heavenly  life.  Whilst,  on  the  contrary, 
the  world,  i.e.  worldly  men,  are  situated  in  the  wicked  one.  That 
is,  they  live  oppressed  beneath  the  tyrannical  power  and  domination 
of  the  devil,  and  in  him  they  lead  a life  impure  and  wicked,  which 
leads  to  hell.  The  Manichaeans,  however,  are  in  error  who  think 
that  the  world  is  placed  in  the  wicked  one  because  it  was  made  by 
the  devil,  as  if  he  in  making  it  breathed  into  it  his  own  wickedness 
and  malignity. 

Another  meaning  that  may  be  given  to  wicked  is  that  it  is  put 
for  wickedness,  depravity.  Whence  Salviatus  (lib.  4 de  Pravid.) 
recalls,  The  whole  world  is  placed  in  evil.  There  is  an  allusion  to 
Gen.  vi.  5,  “ God  saw  that  the  wickedness  of  man  was  great  upon 
the  earth,  and  that  the  whole  thought  of  his  heart  was  intent  to  evil.” 
The  Hebrew  is,  “the  whole  fashioning,  or  imagination,  of  the 
thoughts  of  his  heart  was  evil.”  The  whole  world  therefore  is 
placed  in  wickedness  and  concupiscence  which  entices  to  every 
wickedness.  For  indeed  the  world,  i.e.  all  the  people  of  the  world, 
in  the  Sin  of  Adam  contracted  original  sin  and  concupiscence,  and 


"Digitized-by  Vj 


A 


THE  WICKED  WORLD. 


489 


by  this  they  are  led  to  all  evil.  The  world  therefore  is  an  ocean  ot 
crimes  and  a deluge  of  vices,  according  to  the  words  in  Osee  (iv. 
2),  “Cursing  and  lying  and  murder  and  theft  and  adultery  have 
been  a flood,  and  blood  hath  touched  blood.” 

Experience  teaches  us  that  the  world,  like  Sodom,  is  full  of 
covetousness,  pride,  deceit,  luxury,  gluttony,  and  every  evil. 

S.  John  seems  to  be  alluding  to  the  three  evils  of  the  world 
which  he  spoke  of  in  chap.  ii.  16,  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of 
the  eyes,  and  the  pride  of  life.  Wherefore  he  who  is  wise  flies  from 
the  world,  and  the  conversation  of  worldlings,  and  betakes  himself 
to  a congregation  of  the  Saints,  as  Lot  saved  himself  from  the  burn- 
ing of  Sodom  by  fleeing  to  the  mountain. 

Listen  to  what  was  represented  to  S.  Anselm  in  a heavenly  vision 
concerning  the  unnumbered  evils  of  the  world,  as  it  is  related  in  his 
life  : — “ Being  rapt  in  an  ecstasy,  he  beheld  a mighty  rushing  river, 
into  which  all  the  filth  in  the  world  flowed  from  every  quarter,  so 
that  nothing  could  be  more  horribly  polluted  than  its  waters.  And 
wherever  these  waters  reached,  they  carried  off  and  bore  down  with 
them  men  and  women,  rich  and  poor.  Anselm  being  full  of  wonder 
and  pity  at  this  sight,  inquired  how  these  persons  were  fed,  and  how 
they  could  live.  He  was  told  that  the  unhappy  wretches  drank  and 
were  delighted  with  the  filthy  mud  by  which  they  were  borne  along. 
Then  there  was  added  an  explanation  of  this  mystery.  The  world 
itself  was  the  torrent  in  which  blind  mortals  are  hurried  along  by  the 
riches  and  honours  and  other  objects  of  their  lust  And  although 
they  are  so  wretched  that  they  cannot  even  stand,  yet  they  count 
themselves  happy  and  fortunate.  After  this  he  was  led  into  a certain 
spacious  and  ample  enclosure,  and  whose  walls  were  overlaid  with 
the  purest  silver,  and  shone  in  a marvellous  manner.  In  the  midst 
there  was  a meadow,  and  the  plants  which  were  therein  were  not 
common  herbs,  but  all  of  a soft  and  living  silver.  They  gently  gave 
way  to  him  who  sat  upon  them,  and  when  he  arose  they  again  stood 
up.  The  air,  too,  was  calm  and  pleasant.  And  in  short  all  things 
were  sweet  and  delightful,  so  that  nothing  more  could  seem  to  be 
desirable  for  felicity.  And  it  was  shown  to  him  that  this  was  the 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


490  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  V. 


religious  life.  So  that  without  doubt  God  willed  to  teach  him  by 
this  image  that  all  things  in  the  world  are  unclean,  uncertain,  deadly, 
ever  rushing  headlong ; but  that  in  religion,  on  the  other  hand,  all 
things  are  pleasant — in  fine,  they  are  all  like  silver,  fair  and 
precious.” 

Ver.  20. — And  we  know  that  the  Son  of  God  has  come , &c.  S. 
Ambrose  (lib.  i de  Fid.  c.  7)  reads,  hath  appeared.  The  Apostle 
now  explains  what  he  had  said,  that  we  are  of  God,  and  therefore 
have  overcome  the  world  and  the  wicked  one ; namely,  that  this  has 
been  done  and  is  being  done  through  Christ  God  for  this  very  end 
sent  His  Son  into  the  world  in  our  flesh,  that  by  His  Divine  doctrine 
He  might  give  us  the  sense  and  the  knowledge  of  heavenly  things, 
that  forsaking  our  idols,  and  being  freed  from  sin,  the  devil,  and  the 
world,  as  from  false  gods,  we  might  know  the  true  God,  and  might, 
by  faith,  hope,  and  charity,  be  incorporated  into  Christ  His  Son  and 
His  Church,  and  so  be  endowed  by  Him  with  the  life  of  grace  and 
everlasting  glory.  For  He  is  the  very  true  God,  and  the  true, 
uncreated,  everlasting  Life  itself. 

And  hath  given  us  sense.  ( Vu/g.).  Instead  of  sense  the  Greek  has 
i/avo/afy  which  the  Syriac  renders  understandingy  i.e.9  illumination  of 
the  mind,  divine  knowledge.  Vatablus  translates,  mind. 

That  we  may  know  the  true  Gody  i.e.  the  Father. 

And  may  be  in  His  true  Son . ( Vulg, .).  The  Greek,  the  Syriac, 
and  S.  Athanasius  ( Oral . Deus  de  Deo)  read,  And  may  be  in  Himself 
the  True,  namely  in  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  By  this  is  meant  that 
the  Son  is  of  the  same  substance  with  the  Father,  because  He  is 
True  and  the  Truth  essentially;  namely,  true  God,  even  as  the 
Father. 

In  these  few  words  S.  John  gives  as  it  were  a compendium  of  his 
whole  epistle,  and  of  the  Christian  faith  and  creed.  He  marks  its 
two  chief  mysteries ; namely,  the  oneness  of  Substance  of  the  Father 
and  the  Son,  and  the  Incarnation  of  Christ.  Wherefore  Bede  saith, 
“What  can  be  plainer  than  these  words?  What  more  sweet? 
What  stronger  utterances  can  there  be  against  all  heresies?”  And 
S.  Athanasius  (Disp.  c.  Arius)  says,  “This  is  the  very  thing  which 


THE  TRUE  GOD. 


491 


Anus  asked  for,  a written  demonstration  of  the  Godhead  of  the  Son.” 
And  S.  Cyril  (12  Thesau.  c.  13)  says,  “If  He  (the  Son)  is  true  God, 
this  must  be  as  to  His  Substance,  not  participatively,  as  a creature. 
For  He  who  is  true  God  is  God  by  nature.”  And  S.  Ambrose  (lib. 
1 de  fide , cap . ult.)  says,  " If  He  be  true  God,  surely  He  was  not 
created,  having  nothing  fallacious  or  unreal,  nothing  confused  or 
dissimilar.”  And  in  the  8th  chap,  he  intimates  that  the  expres- 
sions in  the  Nicene  Creed,  “ God  of  God,  Light  of  Light,  very  God  of 
very  God,”  &a,  are  drawn  from  this  verse.  And  S.  Jerome  says, 
“ If  He  were  not  true  (God),  He  would  be  like  an  idol.” 

This  is  the  true  God . Erasmus,  Arianising  after  his  manner,  says, 
and  twisting,  as  he  does  many  passages  of  Scripture  which  speak 
of  the  Divinity  of  the  Son,  perverts  this  passage  also.  He,  he  says, 
viz.,  the  true  God — that  is,  the  Father,  not  the  Son — is  true  God. 
But  this  would  be  tautology.  For  who  does  not  know  that  the  true 
God  is  true  God  ? Wherefore  the  pronoun  He,  or  This  (hie),  does 
not  refer  to  the  words  true  God,  which  preceded,  but  refers  to  the  true 
Son  of  God.  We  may  add  that  in  S.  John’s  age,  just  as  in  later  ages, 
no  one  doubted  about  the  Divinity  of  the  Father,  but  many  doubted 
about,  yea  denied,  the  Godhead  of  the  Son.  It  is  this  therefore 
which  S.  John  labours  to  maintain.  Listen  to  S.  Athanasius  on  the 
words,  All  things  are  delivered  to  Me  of  My  Father:  “ This  Father  is 
Light,  the  Son  is  a beam  and  ray  of  Light,  the  Father  is  true  Light 
and  true  God.  The  Son  is  true  God.  For  so  it  is  written  by  S. 
John,  We  are  in  Jesus  Christ  the  True:  He  is  the  true  God  and 
eternal  Life” 

Ver.  21. — Little  children,  keep  yourselves  from  idols . Amen.  S. 
John  gives  this  last  admonition,  because  in  that  age  idolatry  was  a 
great  danger,  and  it  was  most  needful  to  warn  against  it.  For  at 
that  time  the  whole  world  lay  in  the  wicked  one,  ie.  in  idolatry, 
and  so  Christians  who  were  recently  converted  from  it  were  obliged  to 
be  continually  conversant  with  their  Gentile  and  idolatrous  relations 
and  friends,  to  dine  and  feast  with  them,  when  meats  offered  to 
idols  were  set  before  them  as  sacred  things  to  be  eaten,  concerning 
which  I have  spoken  on  1 Cor.  viii.  Lest,  therefore,  by  their 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


492  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  S.  JOHN,  C.  V. 

examples  and  entreaties  they  should  fall  back  into  idolatry  which 
they  had  lately  forsaken,  S.  John  in  this  last  verse  diligently  warns 
them,  so  that  he  may  fasten  it  deeply  in  their  mind  and  their 
memory,  that  they  should  abstain  from  all  commerce  with  idols, 
and  from  all  meats  offered  to  idols.  So  Didymus,  Lyra,  Cajetan, 
&c.  Beza  and  the  heretics  falsely  render  the  words,  Little  children, , 
keep  yourselves  from  images . For  an  image  is  the  likeness  of  some- 
thing true,  or  real:  but  a simulchrum  or  idol,  of  something  false, 
as  for  instance  of  a false  god.  Thus  Scripture  and  the  Fathers  dis 
tinguish  those  two  words.  And  the  Seventh  (Ecumenical  Council 
pronounces  an  anathema  against  those  who  say  that  the  images  of 
Christ  and  the  Saints  are  idols. 

Now  S.  John  says,  Keep  yourselves  from, , he  does  not  say,  Destroy 
idols , for  this  would  excite  the  rage  of  the  heathen  against  all 
Christians.  Wherefore  S.  Augustine  warns  us  that  the  idols  in 
men’s  hearts  ought  first  to  be  destroyed,  afterwards  those  in  the 
temples.  He  adds  that  those  must  not  be  accounted  Martyrs  who 
are  killed  for  destroying  idols.  But  this  must  be  understood  of 
those  who  did  it  rashly  and  imprudently  so  as  to  cause  scandal 
For  those  who  did  it  advisedly  out  of  greatness  of  soul,  or  by  a 
Divine  prompting,  either  to  confound  the  heathen  or  to  confirm 
the  faithful,  are  reckoned  among  the  Martyrs.  Such  were  S.  Theo- 
doras, S.  Barbara,  S.  Christina,  and  many  others. 

Keep  yourselves  from  idols.  This  means,  Do  not  carve,  or  paint,  or 
polish  them.  Do  not  uncover  the  head  or  bend  the  knee  to  them, 
or  pay  them  any  honour.  Do  not  swear  by  them.  Do  not  eat  meats 
offered  to  them.  Do  not  hold  any  office  connected  with  their 
worship  or  honour.  Do  not  bear  offerings,  frankincense  or  wine,  to 
them.  Do  not  celebrate  their  fame  either  in  prose  or  verse.  With  the . 
greatest  circumspection,  therefore,  were  the  faithful  to  keep  them- 
selves from  idols,  and  to  be  on  their  guard  against  them,  so  as  not 
to  consent  to,  or  take  part  in,  and  so  be  defiled  in  any  manner  with 
idolatrous  rites  and  ceremonies.  Lastly,  S.  John  in  these  words 
rebukes  the  heresy  of  Elxai,  which  arose  towards  the  close  of  his  life. 
Amongst  other  things  he  taught  that  it  was  no  sin  if  any  one  chanced  to 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


A CRAFTY  DECEIVER. 


493 


adore  idols  in  a time  of  hot  persecution,  if  only  a man  did  not  adore 
them  in  his  conscience,  and  if  belief  in  them  were  professed  only  with 
the  lips  and  not  in  the  heart  And  this  crafty  deceiver  was  not 
ashamed  to  cite  in  confirmation  of  his  doctrine  a certain  priest  of  the 
name  of  Phinees,  a descendant  of  Aaron  and  of  the  ancient  Phinees, 
who  in  the  time  of  the  Babylonish  captivity  worshipped  Diana,  and 
thus  at  Susa  escaped  destruction  in  the  presence  of  King  Darius. 
So  S.  Epiphanius  {Hares.  19). 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  AND  THIRD 
EPISTLE  OF  S.  JOHN. 


0 

Several  ancient  writers  have  entertained  doubts  respecting  the 
Second  and  Third  Epistles  of  S.  John,  supposing  them  to  have  been 
written  by  John  the  Presbyter,  not  John  the  Apostle.  They  have 
been  led  to  think  this  because  the  writer  begins  by  calling  himself 
the  Elder,  or  the  Presbyter,  in  Greek  This  doubt  is 

mentioned  by  Eusebius  (If.  E.  lib.  3 cap.  ult.)  and  S Jerome  (de 
Scrip.  Eccles.).  But  that  both  these  Epistles  are  canonical  is  now 
de  fide , and  also  that  they  were  written  by  S.  John  the  Apostle. 
This  appears,  1st  From  the  definition  of  the  Council  of  Trent 
(sess.  4),  and  the  Third  Council  of  Carthage  (cap.  47),  and  the 
Council  of  Laodicaea  (cap.  59),  and  the  84  of  the  Canons  of  the 
Apostles. 

2d.  From  the  Fathers,  viz.  Irenaeus  (lib.  3 c.  13),  S.  Augustine 
(lib.  2 de  Doct.  Christ,  c.  8).  Hear  also  S.  Jerome  (Epis.  ad  Paul.) : 
“James,  Peter,  John,  and  Jude  the  Apostles  published  seven  epistles, 
both  mystical,  succinct,  and  brief,  all  about  the  same  length  : short 
in  words,  long  in  sentences,  so  that  there  are  few  readers  who  are 
unacquainted  with  them.”  * He  says  elsewhere  (Epist.  ad  Evagr .), 
“ The  son  of  thunder,  whom  Jesus  loved  most  dearly,  sounds  with 
his  trumpet ; he,  I mean,  who  from  the  Saviour's  breast  drank  rivers 

* S.  Jerome  uses  the  word  cacutiat.  I am  not  sure,  having  regard  to  the  con- 
text, that  he  does  not  mean,  “ get  out  of  their  depth,”  as  we  say  in  English. 


Digitized  by  CnOOQle 


PREFACE  TO  JOHN'S  SECOND  AND  THIRD  EPISTLES.  495 


of  doctrine,  ‘ the  Presbyter  to  the  Elect  Lady  and  her  children,  whom 
I love  in  the  truth.  ' " 

3d.  Similarity  of  style  and  matter  is  an  argument  for  these  two 
Epistles  having  the  same  author  as  the  first.  This  is  what  Baronius 
says  ( An . 99,  cap.  9) : “ Certainly,  if  ever  it  be  allowable  to  judge 

by  their  likeness  to  one  another  that  children  are  born  of  the  same 
parents,  any  one  can  easily  perceive,  from  the  words,  the  sentences, 
the  style,  the  tone,  bearing  as  they  do  on  the  surface  the  same 
character,  that  these  Epistles  have  proceeded  from  the  same  author. 
First,  with  regard  to  the  words  and  sentences,  there  are  many 
indications  of  this,  as  when  he  says  in  the  First  Epistle  * 1 write  not  a 
new  commandment  unto  you,  but  an  old.’  So  in  the  Second,  ‘Not 
as  writing  a new  commandment  unto  you,  but  that  which  we  have 
had  from  the  beginning.'  Again  in  the  First,  ‘Every  one  who 
denieth  the  Son,  neither  hath  he  the  Father  : he  who  confesseth  the 
Son  hath  the  Father  also.'  And  in  the  Second  he  utters  the  same 
sentiment  in  the  words,  ‘ Every  one  who  draws  back,  and  abides  not 
in  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  hath  not  God  : he  who  abides  in  the 
doctrine  of  Christ  hath  both  the  Father  and  the  Son.'  So  too  in 
the  First,  ‘ Whosoever  is  born  of  God  sinneth  not.  In  the  Third 
the  same  idea  is  thus  expressed,  ‘ He  that  doeth  good  is  of  God ; 
and  he  that  is  born  of  God  sinneth  not.'  And  as  in  the  First  Epistle 
it  is  frequently  inculcated  that  we  should  love  in  deed  and  in  truth, 
in  the  Second  and  Third  there  are  injunctions  to  love  in  truth.  In  the 
First  Epistle  we  find,  ‘ Many  false  prophets  are  gone  out  into  the  world; 
in  this  is  known  the  spirit  of  God,’  &c.  So  in  the  Second  we  find  the 
same  idea  in  almost  identical  words,  ‘There  are  many  seducers 
gone  out  into  the  world  : he  who  confesseth  not  that  Jesus  is  come 
in  the  flesh,  this  is  a seducer  and  an  antichrist.'  Again,  we  have  in 
the  First  Epistle,  ‘This  is  love,  that  we  keep  His  commandments;' 
and  in  the  Second,  ‘ This  is  love,  that  we  walk  according  to  His 
commandments.'  This  continual  inculcation  of  charity,  love,  and 
truth  in  these  two  Epistles  clearly  indicates  that  we  have  in  them  a 


Digitized  by 


Google 


496  PREFACE  TO  JOHN'S  SECOND  AND  THIRD  EPISTLES. 

genuine  transcript  of  the  mind  of  S.  John,  just  as  we  have  in  the 
First.” 

To  the  objection  that  John  writes  of  himself  as  the  Elder,  or 
Presbyter,  I reply  that  in  that  age  Presbyter  and  Bishop  had  the 
same  meaning,  as  I have  shown  on  i Tim.  iv.  14.  Moreover,  S. 
John,  worn  out  at  this  time  with  the  fulness  of  years  and  the  weight 
of  the  apostolic  dignity,  was  the  oldest  of  all  living  Christians.  The 
last  of  the  Apostles,  he  lived  until  the  age  of  Trajan,  and  died 
about  ad.  101. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  OF 

S.  J O H N. 


I  He  exhorteth  a certain  honourable  matron . with  her  children , to  persevere  in 
Christian  lode  and  belief  8 lest  they  lose  the  reward  of  their  former  profession  : 
10  and  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  those  seducers  that  bring  not  the  true 
doctrine  of  Christ  fesus. 

THE  elder  unto  the  elect  lady  and  her  children,  whom  I love  in  the  truth ; 
and  not  I only,  but  also  all  they  that  have  known  the  truth ; 

2  For  the  truth’s  sake,  which  dwelleth  in  us,  and  shall  be  with  us  for  ever. 

3  Grace  be  with  you,  mercy,  and  peace,  from  God  the  Father,  and  from  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  Father,  in  truth  and  love. 

4  I rejoiced  greatly  that  I found  of  thy  children  walking  in  truth,  as  we  have 
received  a commandment  from  the  Father. 

5  And  now  I beseech  thee,  lady,  not  as  though  I wrote  a new  commandment 
unto  thee,  but  that  which  we  had  from  the  beginning,  that  we  love  one  another. 

6  And  this  is  love,  that  we  walk  after  his  commandments.  This  is  the  com- 
mandment, That,  as  ye  have  heard  from  the  beginning,  ye  should  walk  in  it 
7 For  many  deceivers  are  entered  into  the  world,  who  confess  not  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh.  This  is  a deceiver  and  an  antichrist 
8 Look  to  yourselves,  that  we  lose  not  those  things  which  we  have  wrought, 
but  that  we  receive  a full  reward. 

9  Whosoever  transgresseth,  and  abideth  not  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  hath  not 
God.  He  that  abideth  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  he  hath  both  the  Father  and 
the  Son. 

io  If  there  come  any  unto  you,  and  bring  not  this  doctrine,  receive  him  not 
into  your  house,  neither  bid  him  God  speed : 

1 1  For  he  that  biddeth  him  God  speed  is  partaker  of  his  evil  deeds. 

12  Having  many  things  to  write  unto  you,  I would  not  write  with  paper  and 
ink  : but  I trust  to  come  unto  you,  and  speak  face  to  face,  that  our  joy  may  be  full. 
13  The  children  of  thy  elect  sister  greet  thee.  Amen. 

The  Elder:  S.  John,  as  the  last  survivor  of  the  Apostles,  surpassed 

all  the  three  Bishops  both  in  age  and  dignity.  As  S.  Ambrose  says, 

VOL.  v.  21 


Digitized  by  LnOOQle 


SECOND  EPISTLE  OF  S.  JOHK. 


49& 

“ an  Elder,  who  was  furnished  with  a sort  of  swan-like  grace  of  age.” 
And  (Ecumenius  says,  “John  speaks  of  himself  as  a Bishop  under 
the  name  of  a Presbyter.” 

Elect:  Serarius  endeavours  to  prove  by  eight  conjectural  reasons 
that  by  the  name  Electa  is  signified  not  a person,  or  matron,  but  an 
Asiatic  Church.  For  the  Church  is  the  elect  Spouse  of  God,  accord- 
ing to  the  words  in  Cant  vi.  9,  “Fair  as  the  moon,  elect  as  the 
sun”  (Vulg.)\  and  S.  Peter’s  1st  Epist.  v.  13,  “The  Church  in 
Babylon  co-elect  with  you.”  Serarius  thinks  that  this  Church  was 
one  of  the  seven  Churches  of  Asia,  which  S.  John  warns  and  teaches 
in  the  Apocalypse  : or  else  that  it  was  the  Church  of  Corinth,  because 
Gaius  the  host  of  S.  Paul  was  a member  of  it,  as  we  gather  from 
Rom.  xvi.  23  ; and  1 Cor.  i.  14.  For  it  would  seem  that  this  Second 
Epistle  was  sent  with  the  Third  to  the  Church  in  which  Gaius,  to  whom 
the  Third  Epistle  is  inscribed,  lived.  Moreover,  this  Church  is  called 
xu^/a,  i.e.  lady , either  on  account  of  the  dignity  of  the  place,  or 
because  it  excelled  in  virtue. 

But,  omitting  other  things,  it  is  against  this  opinion  that  S.John  says 
in  his  Third  Epistle,  speaking  to  Gaius,  “ I might  perchance  have 
written  to  the  Church,  but  Diotrephes,  who  loveth  to  have  the  primacy 
among  them,  receiveth  not  us.”  He  shows  by  these  words  that  he 
did  not  write  an  Epistle  to  the  Church  where  Caius  was.  Wherefore 
it  is  the  general  opinion  that  the  Epistle  was  written  to  a particular 
matron.  And  that  this  is  the  meaning  of  elect  Lady>  or  the  Lady 
Electa.  What  then  is  the  meaning  of  Electa  l 1st.  Some  say  it 
means  a faithful  Christian  woman.  For  Christians  generally  were 
called  the  elect.  Thus  S.  Peter  (1  Ep.  c.  1)  writes  “to  the  elect 
strangers  of  Pontus,”  &c. 

But  others,  with  more  probability,  think  that  Electa  is  a proper 
name.  For  epistles  are  wont  to  be  inscribed  to  particular  persons, 
who  are  addressed  by  their  proper  names.  This  too  is  why  the  word 
ixXa xrfi  is  without  the  article.  For  if  it  were  an  appellative  noun  it 
would  have  the  article  as  in  the  last  ver.  rf  hXaxrjj. 

Again,  the  word  Electa  is  usually  written  with  a capital  letter.  In 
a similar  manner  many  Christians  had  appellatives  conferred  upon 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  LADY  ELECTA. 


499 


them  instead  of  proper  names,  such  as  Justus,  Justa,  Christianus, 
Christiana.  It  may  be  that  the  faithful  called  her  by  this  name  be- 
cause of  her  eminent  virtue,  especially  because  she  brought  up  her 
daughters  in  the  love  of  virginity,  and  had  a religious  household,  as 
I shall  show  presently.  Thus  Elects  as  meaning  of  excellent  virtue 
and  nobility,  may  answer  to  the  Heb.  bechiray  chosen, , illustrious . 

Again,  it  may  have  been  that  this  matron,  on  account  of  her 
nobility,  influence,  and  virtue,  may  have  been  chosen  to  preside  over 
other  Christian  women,  especially  those  who  were  poor,  that  she 
might  give  them  instruction  in  the  faith  and  Christian  principles, 
and  supply  their  wants  by  procuring  alms  for  them.  Lyra  adds  that 
he  supported  the  ministers  of  the  Church.  She  was  then  a mother, 
and  refuge  of  the  faithful,  such  as  was  S.  Potentiana,  the  sister  of 
S.  Praxedes,  in  the  persecution  of  the  Emperor  Antoninus.  For 
as  the  Apostles  chose  S.  Stephen  and  the  six  other  deacons  for 
such  an  office,  so  did  the  Bishops  subsequently  choose  deaconesses 
to  minister  to  women. 

The  Latin  translation  does  not  call  her  Eclecta , following  the 
Greek,  but  in  the  Latin  form  Electa . This  is  in  favour  of  its  being 
an  appellative  converted  into  a proper  name  by  reason  of  her  dignity 
and  office.  Lucius  Dexter,  in  his  “ Chronicle,”  says  that  this  lady’s 
original  proper  name  was  Drusia . This  is  what  he  says,  “ In  the 
year  of  Christ  105,  S.  John  wrote  his  Second  Epistle  to  Drusia  the 
elect  female,  who  as  a mother  of  the  Church  of  that  city  at  the 
time  abounded  in  charity  and  alms-giving.”  Lastly,  Clement  of 
Alexandria  says,  “The  Second  Epistle  of  John  is  most  simply 
written  to  virgins.  It  is  inscribed  to  a certain  lady  Electa  of 
Babylon.” 

Lady : from  this  it  is  plain  that  this  Electa  was  a noble  and  in- 
fluential matron,  to  whom,  though  not  in  accordance  with  his  usual 
practice,  S.  John  writes  to  confirm  her,  and  through  her  others  in  the 
faith,  that  they  might  not  be  led  astray  by  Ebion,  Cerinthus,  and  the 
Gnostics.  Such  heretics  would  seem  to  have  crept  into  this  lady’s 
house,  and  were  endeavouring  to  infect  her  with  their  false  doctrine. 
S.  John  seems  to  intimate  this  in  the  10th  ver.,  where  he  strictly 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


500  SECOND  EPISTLE  OF  S.  JOHN. 

forbids  her  to  wish  them  God  speed,  or  to  receive  them  into  her 
house. 

There  is  an  allusion  to  a very  pretty  Hebrew  pun,  libeclura  gebira, , 
meaning  the  same  as  chosen , or  elect  Lady . Similarly,  S.  Jerome 
instructed  several  noble  Roman  matrons  by  his  words  and  his 
writings,  and  drew  many  of  them  to  Bethlehem  to  the  monastery  of 
S.  Paula  and  S.  Eustochium  under  his  direction.  This  is  how  he 
answers  the  charge  brought  against  him  for  associating  with  these 
women  (Epist.  140  ad  Princip.\  “If  men  would  search  the  Scrip- 
tures, I should  not  speak  to  women.  If  Barach  had  been  willing  to 
go  out  to  battle  there  would  have  been  no  triumph  for  Debora. 
Jeremiah  is  shut  up  in  prison,  and,  in  order  that  Israel  should  not 
perish  for  lack  of  a prophet  amongst  them,  Huldah  the  prophetess  is 
raised  up.  The  priests  and  Pharisees  crucify  the  Son  of  God,  but 
Mary  Magdalen  is  weeping  at  the  Cross,  is  preparing  ointments,  is 
seeking  Him  in  the  tomb.  She  interrogates  the  gardener,  she 
recognises  the  Lord,  she  runs  to  the  disciples,  she  tells  them  He  is 
found.  While  they  are  doubting,  she  is  full  of  confidence.  She  is 
a true  tower  (*r voyms)*  yea  a very  tower  of  ivory  and  cedar 
looking  toward  Damascus,  that  is  to  the  Blood  of  the  Saviour,  which 
calls  to  deeds  of  penitence.  It  ceased  to  be  with  Sara  after  the 
manner  of  women,  and  Abraham  was  made  subject  unto  her,  and  it 
was  said  to  him,  ‘ Whatsoever  Sara  saith  unto  thee,  hearken  unto  her 
voice.’  ” But  this  particular  conduct  of  S.  Jerome  is  certainly  not 
for  every  one  to  imitate ; indeed,  with  young  women  it  should  be 
wholly  avoided. 

And  her  children:  Clement  of  Alexandria  testifies  that  these 
children  were  virgins,  and  thus  are  affectionately  saluted  by  the 
virgin  John.  It  seems  then  that  Electa  brought  up  her  daughters 
for  virginity  and  holiness,  so  that  her  home  might  be  called  a very 
Parthenon,  or  convent  of  virgins. 

Whom  I love  in  the  truths  i.e.  truly,  sincerely.  In  the  truth,  i.e. 
in  Christian  charity.  Or,  in  the  truth , i.e.  in  the  Lord,  who  is  Truth. 

This  word  is  not  in  Liddell  and  Scott , but  I take  it  to  be  a feminine  form  of 
*6pyot. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


SALUTATION  AND  EXHORTATION. 


501 

And  not  I only , &c.  “ This  common  love  removes  all  suspicion 

of  private  affection,  and  makes  it  of  greater  force,”  says  the  Inter . 
Gloss. 

Ver.  2. — For  the  TrutKs  sake . He  means,  I love  them  in  the  Truth, 
because  they  themselves  constantly  adhere  to  the  Truth,  i.e.  to  the 
true  faith.  And  Electa  and  her  daughters  showed  that  they  had  this 
true  faith,  because  they  showed  it  in  works  of  love  to  the  brethren. 
Therefore  did  S.  John  love  them.  “ I love  them,”  he  means  to  say, 
“for  the  Truth's  sake,  because  they  live  a life  agreeable  to  the  truth 
of  the  Gospel.” 

Ver.  3. — Grace,  mercy , and peace  be  with  you.  Concerning  this  salu- 
tation I have  spoken  in  the  beginning  of  St.  Paul’s  Epistles  to  Titus, 
the  Romans,  and  Corinthians.  He  adds  mercy  (or,  as  the  Syriac  trans- 
lation, compassions)  to  grace , that  by  the  mercies  which  they  had  re- 
ceived, and  were  daily  receiving  from  God  through  Christ,  he  might 
stir  up  Electa  and  her  children  to  show  like  mercy  to  their  neighbours. 
For  all,  however  holy  they  may  be,  still  are  poor  and  weak,  and 
need  the  mercy  of  God,  either  because  they  fall,  or  are  in  danger 
of  falling. 

In  truth  and  love,  understand,  that  ye  may  persevere  and  increase 
in  them.  Catharinus  takes  it  differently,  thus:  “The  grace,  mercy, 
and  peace  which  I ask  for  you  consist  in  the  truth,  i.e.  true  doctrine, 
in  faith,  and  the  charity  in  which  ye  sincerely  love  one  another  for 
God’s  sake.  For  in  those  two  things  the  perfection  of  Christ  consists. 
This  is  a very  apposite  meaning,  easy  and  obvious,  and  requires 
nothing  to  be  understood,  or  supplied. 

I was  exceeding  glad  because  I found  of  thy  children.  Of  thy 
children . This  is  a Hebraism.  There  is  a similar  grammatical  form 
in  Ps.  lxxii.  16,  “To  Him  shall  be  given  of  the  gold  of  Arabia,  and 
they  shall  worship  of  Him  ” (de  ipso ),  i.e.  “ shall  worship  Him” 

Electa  seems  to  have  had  many  sons  or  grandsons,  for  they  too  are 
called  children. 

Walking  in  the  Truth : ordering  their  lives  according  to  the  rule 
of  the  Gospel  Observe,  he  does  not  say  standing,  or  sitting,  to 
signify  that  they  made  daily  progress  in  the  Christian  life,  and  went 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


502  SECOND  EPISTLE  OF  S.  JOHN. 

on  from  virtue  to  virtue,  in  which  he  proposes  them  as  a model  for 
imitation. 

As  we  have  received  commandment  from  the  Father . For  the  Father 
has  commanded  through  the  Son,  even  as  Christ  saith  ( John  xv.  15), 
“All  things  whatsoever  I have  heard  of  the  Father  I have  made 
known  unto  you.” 

Ver.  5. — And  now , I beseech  thee , Lady>  &c.  This  must  be  referred 
to  the  end  of  the  verse,  that  we  love  one  another  I beseech  thee,  lady, 
to  exercise  thyself,  and  those  who  belong  to  thee,  in  mutual  love. 
For  this  commandment  of  love  is  not  recent  and  new,  but  delivered 
by  Christ  to  me  and  the  rest  of  the  Apostles  at  the  very  beginning  of 
the  Gospel.  Observe  the  modesty  of  S.  John  as  something  which 
ought  to  be  imitated  by  Prelates,  in  that  he  says,  I beseech  thee , Lady , 
when  he  might  have  said,  I command  thee, , O my  daughter . 

Ver.  6. — For  this  is  the  commandment . . . that  ye  should  walk , &c. 
Viz.,  that  ye  should  make  careful  progress  in  evangelical  truth  and 
love,  growing  and  making  progress  in  the  love  of  God  and  your 
neighbours,  as  I enjoined  upon  you  in  the  very  beginning  of  my 
preaching. 

Ver.  7. — Because  many  seducers  are  going  out  into  the  world.  He 
now  passes  to  the  second  branch  of  his  epistle,  from  charity  to 
evangelical  truth.  For  these  two  virtues  are  inseparable  sisters  and 
companions.  Now  the  word  because  gives  the  reason  for  what  he 
had  said  in  the  verse  preceding.  “ I have  said  that  ye  should  walk 
in  charity,  should  make  progress  in  the  commandment  of  Gospel 
truth  and  charity,  because  many  seducers  are  gone  out  into  the  world, 
who  endeavour  to  overturn  this  truth,  and  as  a consequence 
Christian  charity,  and  to  tear  it  from  you.  Of  such  therefore  ye 
ought  to  beware  as  of  wolves.  For  they  strive  to  draw  you  away 
from  union  with  Christ  to  their  own  conventicles  of  Satan.” 

This  is  a seducer  and  an  antichrist  Whosoever  thinks,  or  teaches, 
that  Christ  has  not  come  in  the  flesh,  has  not  been  incarnate ; this 
man  is  a deceiver. 

Ver.  8. — Lest  ye  lose  that  which  ye  have  wrought:  the  Greek  reads 
in  the  first  person,  lest  we  losef  &c.  Lest  I should  have  preached  to 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


CAUTIONS  AGAINST  RECEIVING  HERETICS.  503 


you  in  vain,  and  lest  both  I and  you  should  lose  all  our  former 
labour.  As  the  old  saying  hath  it,  “ There  is  no  greater  unhappiness 
than  to  remember  that  we  once  were  happy.’* 

But  that  ye  may  receive  a full  reward.  That  is,  if  ye  take  heed 
to  yourselves,  and  persevere,  your  perseverance  will  bring  you  a 
full  reward.  Full \ i.e.  copious  and  abundant.  For  he  who  falls 
back,  even  though  he  afterwards  repent,  receives  only  a half  reward, 
for  he  loses  all  the  time  and  the  works  of  the  period  of  his  apostasy. 
The  Greek  has  dvoXdftufMtf,  that  we  may  receive , for  the  reward  of  an 
Apostle  and  teacher  is  full  when  he  sees  the  fruit  of  his  works  in  his 
disciples,  and  when  he  is  honoured  and  crowned,  not  only  in  himself, 
but  in  them.  As  S.  Paul  says,  “ What  is  our  hope,  or  joy,  or  crown 
of  glory  ? Ye  are  our  glory  and  joy.” 

Ver.  9. — Whosoever  goeth  back,  &c.  The  Greek  is  mgojSoiM’,  i.e. 
who  transgresses . The  Syriac  reads,  he  who  passes  by,  and  does  not 
abide  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ , has  not  God  for  his  friend. 

Ver.  10. — If  any  one  come  to  you,  and  bring  not  this  doctrine,  &c. 
S.  John  in  this  place  not  only  advises,  as  some  think,  but  also 
commands  Electa  and  all  the  rest  of  the  faithful  not  to  receive  to 
hospitality,  nor  say  Hail,  to  any  one  who  brings  another  doctrine,  i.e. 
one  which  is  contrary  to  the  orthodox  faith  of  Christ  For  he  who 
saith  hail  to  such  is  partaker  of  their  evil  deeds.  That  is,  he  seems  to 
favour  and  applaud  the  heretical  teacher. 

Observe,  not  only  by  human  and  canon  laws,  as  since  the  time  of 
S.  John  they  have  been  enacted  by  Pontiffs  and  Councils,  heretics 
are  to  be  avoided  in  three  cases.  The  first  is,  when  there  is  danger 
lest  you  or  yours  should  be  perverted  by  them,  which  is  a thing 
which  ordinarily  happens.  For,  as  S.  Paul  saith,  “ Their  word  doth 
creep  a9  doth  a cancer.”  (2  Tim.  ii.  17.) 

2d.  When,  by  receiving,  you  would  seem  to  favour  his  heresy,  and 
tacitly  profess  or  encourage  it.  As,  for  example,  if  you  were  to 
receive  to  your  house  and  table  a recognised  Calvinistic  minister, 
who  came  for  the  purpose  of  propagating  his  heresy.  In  the  same 
way  it  would  be  wrong  to  be  present  at  his  preaching,  or  eucharists, 
or  to  communicate  with  him  in  sacris , 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


504 


SECOND  EPISTLE  OF  S.  JOHN. 


3d.  When  you  give  scandal  to  others,  so  that  they,  thinking  you 
to  be  a host  and  patron  of  heretics,  should  be  by  your  example 
emboldened  to  do  the  same. 

These  cases  being  excepted,  intercourse  with  heretics  is  not  for- 
bidden by  the  Divine  and  natural  law,  especially  if  necessity,  or 
mercy,  or  grave  benefit  counsels  it 

What  S.  John  here  teaches  by  way  of  precept  he  enforced  by  his 
example.  For  having  entered  into  a bath,  as  soon  as  he  saw 
Cerinthus  there,  he  sprang  out,  crying,  “ Let  us  flee  quickly  lest  the 
bath  in  which  is  Cerinthus,  the  enemy  of  the  truth,  should  fall 
upon  us ! ” 

S.  John's  disciple,  S.  Poly  carp,  followed  his  master,  saying  in  his 

Epistle  to  the  Philippians*  in  allusion  to  these  words  of  S.  John, 

“ Abstain,”  he  says,  “ from  scandals,  and  from  false  brethren,  who 

bear  the  name  of  the  Lord  in  vain,  who  cause  foolish  men  to  go 

astray.  For  every  one  who  confesseth  not  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come 

in  the  flesh,  he  is  antichrist : and  he  who  confesses  not  the  mystery 

* 

of  the  Cross  is  a devil.”  Thus  wrote  holy  Polycarp,  and  he  acted 
accordingly.  For  meeting  the  heretic  Marcion,  and  being  asked  by 
him  if  he  knew  him,  he  answered,  “ I know  thee  to  be  the  devil's 
first-born.” 

Thus  S.  Hermenegild  was  slain  by  command  of  his  father,  Levvi- 
gild,  king  of  the  Goths,  because  he  would  not  receive  the  Eucharist 
at  Easter  from  an  Arian  bishop.  This  is  related  by  S.  Gregory 
(3  Dial \ 31),  who  calls  him  a martyr  of  the  Church. 

Eusebius  of  Vercelli,  being  taken  by  the  Arians,  preferred  to  die 
of  hunger  rather  than  take  food  from  those  heretics. 

S.  Paphnutius  took  Maximus  Bishop  of  Jerusalem  by  the  hand 
when  he  was  through  simplicity  associating  with  heretics,  and  led 
him  away  from  them,  saying,  “ I cannot  suffer  so  venerable  a bishop 
to  sit  in  the  seat  of  pestilence,  and  to  communicate  with  unclean 
heretics  even  by  a word.” 

When  S.  Martin  communicated  with  the  Bishops  of  the  Ithacian 
sect,  in  the  hope  of  saving  them,  he  was  warned  by  an  angel  not  to 
do  so.  And  although  he  repented,  he  experienced  a diminution  of 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


WARNINGS  AND  SALUTATIONS.  505 

grace,  so  that  he  did  not  work  so  many  miracles  as  he  had  pre- 
viously wrought  (Snip.  Sever \ lib . 3 Dial.) 

Still  more  are  heretical  books  to  be  avoided.  For  these  pestilent 
productions  conceal  their  heresy  like  a plague  under  an  appearance 
of  elegance  and  wisdom,  and  instil  it  into  the  minds  of  the  readers. 
In  this  present  age  the  heresy  of  Luther  and  Calvin  has  been  dis- 
persed through  so  many  kingdoms  by  means  of  their  books.  If  you 
wish  to  take  away  their  heresy,  take  away  their  books  and  their 
ministers.  In  truth  you  will  have  taken  it  away  as  soon  as  you 
have  substituted  pious  and  learned  priests  and  preachers. 

Neither  say  godspeed  (ave)  to  him . The  Syriac  has,  ye  shall  not  say 
either  hail  to  him  or  farewell.  The  ancient  Romans  said  ave , or 
salve  at  coming  in,  vale  at  going  out.  Ave  then  here  means  the 
same  as  the  Greek  ^a/Vi/v,  rejoice. 

For  he  who  saith  to  him  Ave  (Syriac  rejoice)  is  a partaker  in  his 
evil  deeds . For  he  who  salutes  a heretical  teacher  seems  to  approve 
his  heresy.  Some  Latin  copies  add  here,  Lo , I have  told  you  before- 
handy that  ye  may  not  be  confounded  in  the  day  of  the  Lord. 

Ver.  1 2. — Having  many  things , &c.  Either  because  they  were  con- 
fidential, or  because  letters  might  perish,  or  fall  into  the  hands  of 
unbelievers,  who  would  interpret  them  falsely. 

For  1 hope  to  come  unto  you.  This  shows  that  this  letter  was  not 
written  and  sent  to  a lady  at  Babylon,  as  Clement  of  Alexandria 
says,  but  to  some  one  in  Asia  Minor,  or  Greece  near  to  Ephesus. 
For  S.  John,  who  was  now  in  extreme  old  age  and  infirm,  was  wont 
to  make  excursions  to  the  neighbouring  cities  of  Asia  to  instruct 
and  confirm  them,  but  not  to  go  as  far  as  Babylon. 

That  your  joy  may  be  full:  For  the  living  voice  of  a Doctor  and 
Apostle,  especially  S.  John,  would  bring  far  more  joy,  instruction, 
comfort,  and  devotion  than  any  mere  letters. 

Ver.  13. — The  children  of  thy  sister  Electa  salute  thee.  From  hence 
CEcumenius  and  our  Serarius  maintain  that  the  name  of  Electa , to 
whom  this  Epistle  is  inscribed,  is  an  appellative  noun  and  the  title 
of  some  particular  church.  They  think  the  meaning  is,  “The 
children  of  thy  sister,  i.e.  the  faithful  of  the  elect  Church  of  Ephesus, 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


50 6 


SECOND  EPISTLE  OF  S.  JOHN. 


salute  thee,  O elect  Church  of  Corinth.  Some  think  that  these 
Electas  were  particular  persons,  but  were  called  sisters,  not  as  being 
so  in  the  flesh,  but  because  they  were  disciples  of  the  same  master, 
S.  John. 

It  is  probable  that  the  sister  of  Electa  was  also  called  Electa  on 
the  principle  that  in  many  families  two  or  more  children  bear  the 
same  name,  so  that  there  are  two  Johns,  two  Peters,  two  Marys, 
or  Margarets.  I add  what  I have  intimated  at  the  commencement 
of  the  Epistle,  that  Electa  is  not  so  strictly  a proper  as  an 

appropriated  name,  a title,  so  to  say,  of  dignity  and  office  which  is 

bestowed  upon  several  persons  discharging  similar  functions.  Electa 
thus  seems  to  have  been  the  name  of  a chief  matron,  who  like  a 
mother  supported  the  ministers  of  the  Church,  the  widows,  the 
orphans,  and  the  poor,  and  who  as  a Deaconess  presided  over  the 
instruction  and  government  of  other  women  in  the  Church.  The 
meaning  then  is,  “ O Electa,  mother  of  the  faithful  in  the  Church, 

say  of  Corinth,  the  children  of  thy  sister,  who  is  also  Electa,  a 

mother  of  the  faithful,  in  the  Church  of  Ephesus,  from  whence  I 
write,  salute  thee.”  It  is  in  favour  of  this  that  the  Greek  article 
is  prefixed  to  Electa,  which  is  not  usual  in  the  use  of  proper  names, 
but  to  names  of  dignity  and  office  appropriated  to  certain  persons. 

It  is  an  instance  of  the  kindness  and  courtesy  of  S.  John  that 
he  salutes  Electa,  not  only  in  his  own  name,  but  in  the  name  of 
his  grandchildren. 

Some  Greek  and  Latin  codices  add,  Grace  be  with  them.  Amen, 
This  is  a salutation  worthy  of  S.  John  and  common  with  S.  Paul. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THE  THIRD  EPISTLE  OF 

S.  JOHN. 


I  He  commmdeth  Gains  for  his  piety%  5 and  hospitality  7 to  true  preachers : 9 com • 
plaining  of  the  unkind  dealing  of  ambitious  Diotrephes  on  the  contrary  side9 
II  whose  evil  example  is  not  to  be  followed:  12  and giveth  special  testimony  to 
the  good  report  of  Demetrius, 

THE  elder  unto  the  wellbeloved  Gaius,  whom  I love  in  the  truth. 

2  Beloved,  I wish  above  all  things  that  thou  mayest  prosper  and  be  in 
health,  even  as  thy  soul  prospereth. 

3  For  I rejoiced  greatly,  when  the  brethren  came  and  testified  of  the  truth  that 
is  in  thee,  even  as  thou  walkest  in  the  truth. 

4  I have  no  greater  joy  than  to  hear  that  my  children  walk  in  truth. 

5  Beloved,  thou  doest  faithfully  whatsoever  thou  doest  to  the  brethren,  and  to 
strangers : 

6  Which  have  borne  witness  of  thy  charity  before  the  church  : whom  if  thou 
bring  forward  on  their  journey  after  a godly  sort,  thou  shalt  do  well : 

7  Because  that  for  his  name’s  sake  they  went  forth,  taking  nothing  of  the 
Gentiles. 

8  We  therefore  ought  to  receive  such,  that  we  might  be  fellowhelpers  to  the 
truth. 

9  I wrote  unto  the  church : but  Diotrephes,  who  loveth  to  have  the  pre-eminence 
among  them,  receiveth  us  not. 

10  Wherefore,  if  I come,  I will  remember  his  deeds  which  he  doeth,  prating 
against  us  with  malicious  words  : and  not  content  therewith,  neither  doth  he  him- 
self receive  the  brethren,  and  forbiddeth  them  that  would,  and  casteth  them  out 
of  the  church. 

II  Beloved,  follow  not  that  which  is  evil,  but  that  which  is  good.  He  that 
doeth  good  is  of  God  : but  he  that  doeth  evil  hath  not  seen  God. 

12  Demetrius  hath  good  report  of  all  men , and  of  the  truth  itself : yea,  and  we 
also  bear  record  ; and  ye  know  that  our  record  is  true. 

13  I had  many  things  to  write,  but  I will  not  with  ink  and  pen  write  unto  thee : 
14  But  I trust  I shall  shortly  see  thee,  and  we  shall  speak  face  to  face.  Peace 
bf  to  thee.  Our  friends  salute  thee.  Greet  the  friends  by  name, 


Digitized  by  LnOOQle 


5o8 


THIRD  EPISTLE  OF  S.  JOHN. 


1.  To  Gains , the  Greek  form  of  Cains.  Who  was  this  Cains  ? 
Lucius  Dextor  in  his  “ Chronicle  ” thinks  he  was  the  son  of  Caius 
Oppius,  the  centurion.  He  thus  writes  concerning  him : — u S.  John 
the  Theologian  wrote  from  Ephesus  to  the  Spaniard  Caius,  the  son 
of  Caius  Malacitanus,  the  centurion,  and  brother  of  Demetrius,  a 
hospitable  man,  whose  father  was  afterwards  Bishop  of  Milan. 
Now  Diotrephes  hindered  the  guests  who  were  coming  into  the 
Spains  for  the  sake  of  pilgrimage.  This  wicked  bishop  was  after- 
wards deposed  on  account  of  his  crimes  and  his  pride.  There  was 
a pilgrimage  from  many  other  places  to  the  holy  places  of  Spain  from 
the  very  times  of  the  Apostles,  when  Caius  Oppius  the  centurion 
supported  the  pilgrims.  This  Caius  was  domiciled  at  Corinth,  but 
of  Spanish  descent.  He  also  liberally  entertained  in  his  house  the 
blessed  Paul  when  he  was  returning  from  Spain,  and  he  invited  John 
when  he  was  going  redeuntim  into  Spain  after  his  exile.  He  accom- 
panied John,  and  was  at  Rome  until  the  time  of  Hyginus.  After 
that  he  went  to  Milan,  and  being  made  Bishop  there  died  in  the 
Lord.”  So  also  Onuphrius  in  his  “ Chronicle  ” makes  Caius  the  third 
Bishop  of  Milan.  But  he  says  he  was  a Roman,  not  a Spaniard. 

2.  Bede,  the  Gloss,  Ambrosiaster,  and  many  others  think  that 
this  Caius  was  the  Corinthian,  of  whom  S.  Paul,  writing  from 
Corinth  to  the  Romans,  says  (xiv.  23),  “Gaius,  mine  host 
and  of  the  whole  church”  (as  Bede  and  the  Greek  read),  “salutes 
you.”  This  was  because  of  his  hospitality  in  receiving  any  members 
of  the  Church  into  his  house.  In  like  manner,  S.  John  here  warmly 
commends  this  Caius  for  his  hospitality.  S.  Paul  also  says  of 
Caius  (1  Cor \ i.  14),  “I  baptized  none  of  you  save  Crispus  and 
Gaius.”  Moreover,  S.  Athanasius,  in  his  Synopis , testifies  that  this 
Caius  was  an  intimate  friend  of  S.  John's,  and  that  he  wrote  his 
Gospel  at  S.  John's  dictation. 

Mariana  and  Serarius  add  that  this  Caius  is  the  same  as  he  to 
whom  four  Epistles  of  S.  Dionysius  the  Areopagite  are  extant  They 
are  inscribed  to  Caius  the  Therapeutes,  i.e.  the  Essene,  or  monk. 
It  is  considered  to  favour  this  idea  that  S.  John  writes  to  his  Caius 
in  ver.  u,  “He  that  doeth  good  is  of  God  : he  that  doeth  not  good 


KINDLY  EXHORTATIONS. 


509 


hath  not  seen  God.”  For  the  Therapeutae,  giving  themselves  up 
continually  to  pious  contemplation,  by  this  means  saw  God.  From 
hence  they  were  called  Seers,  like  the  Prophets  of  old. 

Ver.  2. — Concerning  all  I make  prayer  that  thou  mayest  prosper  and 
he  well , &c.  The  meaning  is,  I wish  that  thou  in  all  things  mayest  be 
well  and  prosper,  as  now  indeed  thy  soul,  i.e.  thou  thyself,  art  well 
and  dost  prosper  in  all  things.  For  God  does  prosper  thee  in  all 
things  both  in  mind  and  body.  He  blesses  and  enlarges  thy  family, 
thy  servants,  thy  friends,  thy  riches,  and  all  that  thou  hast,  because 
thou  expendest  it  in  God’s  service,  and  in  providing  for  the  ministers 
of  the  Church  and  the  poor.  Thus  God  blessed  all  good  men,  and 
made  a hedge  about  His  friends  in  the  old  time,  as  Abraham 
(Gen.  xxii  17),  and  many  more. 

Ver.  3. — I rejoiced  greatly  when  the  brethren  came  and  bore  witness 
to  thy  truth.  Vulgate . Truth  here  in  the  first  place  means  the 

faith.  “ They  testify  that  thou  dost  constantly  persevere  in  Chris- 
tian faith  and  doctrine  through  all  persecutions.”  2d.  This  truth 
means  moral  conduct.  u They  testify  that  thou  livest  according  to 
the  faith  and  truth  of  the  Gospel,  that  thy  character  is  conformable 
to  the  Gospel  which  thou  professest”  3d.  Truth  in  this  place  may 
be  taken  to  mean  charity  and  beneficence.  For  this  is  especially 
taught  and  sanctioned  by  the  truth  of  the  Gospel.  4th.  Truth  may 
be  put  for  sincerity  and  candour  as  opposed  to  hypocrisy  and  dis- 
simulation. “ They  testify  that  thou  art  in  all  things  candid  and 
sincere.” 

Ver.  4. — Greater  grace  than  these  I have  none.  (Vulgate.)  That 
is,  nothing  can  be  more  grateful  or  pleasing  to  me  than  that  they 
so  act  that  I may  hear  they  are  walking  in  the  truth  that  I have 
spoken  of.  Instead  of  xd^/v,  grace,  some  Greek  MSS.  read  x*fav> 
joy.  This  is  followed  by  the  Syriac.  S.  Jerome  on  the  5th  chapter 
to  the  Ephesians  mentions  that  celebrated  axiom  of  Christ,  “ Never 
be  joyful  except  when  ye  shall  see  a brother  in  charity.” 

Ver.  5. — Dearly  beloved,  one  thou  doest  faithfully,  &c.  Faithfully, 
ue.  thou  actest  in  a Christian  manner,  thou  doest  that  which  be- 
cometh  a believer,  by  showing  hospitality  towards  and  nourishing 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


5io 


THIRD  EPISTLE  OF  S.  JOHN. 


the  faithful,  especially  pilgrims  and  strangers.  For  hospitality  was 
of  old  most  highly  esteemed  by  Christians.  It  was  a sure  mark 
and  sign  of  Christian  faith,  as  the  heathen  Lucian  testifies  (in 
Peregrino). 

2d.  Faithfully  in  this  place  not  only  signifies  the  faith , but  also 
the  fidelity  of  Caius.  Thou  art  faithful  to  Christ  Thou  fulfillest 
indeed  that  which  thou  hast  promised  to  Christ  in  thy  baptism. 
Listen  to  Tertullian  recounting  hospitality  amongst  the  notes  of  the 
faithful  (de  Preescrip.  c.  20) : “ Amongst  the  many  and  notable  marks 
of  the  Church  there  is  one  prime  note  handed  down  by  the  Apostles 
by  which  all  the  chief  and  Apostolic  Churches  prove  their  oneness 
and  their  unity.  This  mark  is  the  communion  of  peace,  the  attesta- 
tion of  brotherhood,  the  mutual  bond  (contesserationem)  of  hospi- 
tality. And  the  one  principle  which  governs  these  rules  of  hospi- 
tality is  the  one  tradition  of  the  same  Sacrament.”  He  makes  use 
of  the  word  eontesseratio  because  of  the  tessera , or  sign,  which  Chris- 
tians were  wont  to  exhibit  to  Christians  to  show  that  they  were 
Christians,  that  so  they  might  be  received  to  brotherly  hospitality. 
The  heathen  had  similar  tessera,  or  mutual  tokens  and  pledges  of 
hospitality.  It  was  because  the  heathen  discovered,  and  used  these 
Christian  tokens  for  purposes  of  deceit,  as  Lucian  tells  us  Peregrinus 
did,  that  the  Council  of  Mie  substituted  commendatory  letters  instead 
of  tessera . On  which  see  Baronius. 

And  this  to  strangers,  Greek  xai  ug  rovg  ghoug.  The  xai  here  means 
especially . Thus  Christ  says,  “ Tell  the  disciples,  and,  i.e.  especially, 
Peter.”  (Mark  xvi.  17.) 

Moreover,  by  peregrini  here  we  may  understand  with  Bede  apos- 
tolic men  who  went  about  spreading  the  Gospel.  Also  Christian 
exiles  proscribed  by  the  Gentiles. 

Ver.  6. — Who  have  borne  testimony  to  thy  charity  in  the  face  of  the 
Church . For  of  old  the  bishops  and  presbyters  used  to  invite  guests 
who  came  to  give  a sermon  or  exhortation  in  the  church.  And 
when  they  did  this  they  would  praise  the  charity  and  hospitality  of 
Caius,  of  which  they  had  experienced  elsewhere.  This  duty  of 
showing  hospitality  to  guests  is  spoken  of  by  S.  Clement  (lib.  2 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


CAIUSS  CHARITY  COMMENDED.  511 

Constit . c.  62),  and  is  sanctioned  by  the  4th  Council  of  Carthage, 
cap.  4. 

Whom  if  thou  bring  fonvard  on  their  journey  after  a godly  sort  thou 
shalt  do  well . (E.  V.)  To  whom  doing  good  thou  shalt  lead  (deduces) 

worthily  of  God,  The  meaning  is,  To  whom,  if  thou  continuest  to 
show  kindness  by  receiving  them  to  hospitality,  thou  wilt  cause  their 
journey  to  be  easy,  so  that  they  will  be  able  to  reach  the  place 
whither  they  are  going.  This  is  a pious  work  and  worthy  of  God. 
The  word  translated  deduces  in  the  Vulg.  is  at  in  the  Greek. 

It  does  not  mean  that  S.  John  wished  Caius  personally  to  accompany 
his  guests,  but  it  refers  to  his  affording  them  provisions  for  their 
journey,  and  other  things,  such  as  guides  and  letters  of  introduction. 

Worthily  of  God \ As  it  is  worthy  of  God  that  His  worshippers 
should  treat  worthily  other  worshippers  of  Him,  honouring  them  as 
ministers  of  God,  and  honouring  God  in  them,  by  treating  them 
charitably  and  reverently  as  befits  servants  and  members  of  Chiist. 
As  Christ  saith,  Matt.  x.  40,  “ He  that  receiveth  you  receiveth  Me. 
He  that  receiveth  Me  receiveth  Him  that  sent  Me.  He  that 
receiveth  a prophet  in  the  name  of  a prophet  shall  receive  a 
prophet’s  reward.” 

Moraliter:  let  every  believer  examine  himself,  and  see  whether 
his  works  be  full,  perfect,  and  of  such  excellence  as  to  be  worthy  of 
God ; whether  his  charity  be  like  to  the  charity  of  God  and  Christ ; 
whether  he  live  and  act  worthily  of  Christ.  The  gift  which  thou 
presentest  to  a king  must  not  be  of  some  mean  sort.  It  should  be 
excellent  and  regal.  What  then  does  it  become  us  to  offer  unto 
God,  who  is  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords  ? This  is  what  S. 
Paul  admonishes  the  Ephesians  (iv.  1.),  “ I,  the  prisoner  of  the  Lord, 
beseech  you  that  ye  walk  worthy  of  the  vocation  wherewith  ye  are 
called.” 

Ver.  7.1 — For  they  have  gone  forth  on  behalf  of  His  name , viz.,  > that 
they  might  preach  the  name  of  God  and  Christ,  says  Bede.  Or 
else  because  for  His  name  they  have  been  driven  into  exile.  The 
first  of  these  is  the  more  probable  reason.  And  it  is  strengthened 
by  what  follows. 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


512 


THIRD  EPISTLE  OF  S.  JOHN. 

V* 

Taking  nothing  of  the  Gentiles . Because  without  price  they  preach 
the  Gospel  to  the  Gentiles,  that  they  may  not  seem  to  gain  any 
profit  by  the  Gospel. 

Ver.  8. — We  therefore  ought  to  receive  such . The  Greek  for  receive 
is  xara This  means,  not  to  wait  until  they  come  to  us, 
but  to  prevent  them,  to  invite  4hem  to  our  house,  yea,  to  constrain 
them  to  come  in.  (Ecumenius  says,  as  the  disciples  constrained 
Christ  at  Emmaus  ( Luke  xxiv.  29).  Moreover  to  receive  and 
reception  means  in  Scripture  every  sort  of  kindness  and  protection, 
care  and  assistance. 

That  we  may  be  fellow-workers  with  the  truths  by  ministering 
necessary  things  to  those  who  preach  the  truth  or  who  suffer  exile 
or  tribulation  for  the  truth’s  sake. 

Observe : S.  John  by  many  arguments  stirs  up  Caius  to  persevere 
in  his  liberality  to  pilgrims.  1st.  He  praises  his  generosity  because 
also  his  guests  praised  it  before  the  whole  Church.  ( Ver . 3.)  2d. 

Because  it  was  a work  befitting  a Christian  believer.  ( Ver.  5.)  3d. 

Because  it  was  a work  worthy  of  God.  ( Ver.  6.)  4th.  Because  it 
was  done  to  those  who  made  known  the  name  of  God.  ( Ver.  7.) 
5th.  Because  it  was  done  to  those  who  were  forsaken  or  despoiled  by 
other  Gentiles.  ( Ver.  7.)  6th.  Because  by  this  means  they  became 
fellow-workers  with  the  truth  and  the  Gospel,  and  preached  it  them- 
selves  through  the  preachers  and  confessors  whom  they  received  and 
nourished. 

Moreover,  when  S.  John  exhorts  Caius  to  persevere  in  hospitality 
he  makes  use  of  the  first  person,  “we  ought  therefore,”  that  his 
exhortation  may  be  sweeter  and  more  powerful.  Certain  it  is  that 
S.  John  was  very  hospitable  to  pilgrims.  For  he  was  the  Bishop  of 
Ephesus,  and  in  that  capacity  was  wont  to  dispense  the  goods  of  the 
Ephesian  Church  to  the  poor  and  strangers.  Moreover,  Bede  says 
that  S.  John,  like  S.  Paul,  lived  by  the  labour  of  his  hands. 

9.  I would  have  written , it  may  be,  to  the  Church.  The  Greek  is 
4/a,  i.e . I have  written.  So  Erasmus,  Cajetan,  Vatablus,  Clarius, 
who  think  the  Vulg.  of  this  passage  is  corrupt  But  Gagneius, 

Serarius,  &c.  think  the  translator’s  reading  was  a*,  or  at  least 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


PRIDE*  AND  ARROGANCE  CONDEMNED.  513 

that  fa  ought  to  be  understood.  They  think  this  forthree  reasons : 
1 st.  Because  it  gives  the  better  meaning.  " I would  have  written, 
but  I have  not  written,  because  that  iproud  Diotrephes  receives 
neither  us,  nor  our  letters.”  2d.  Because  there  is  no  extanf  letter  of  S. 
John  to  a church.  3d.  Because  the  Syriac  version  entirely-stfpports 
this  reading.  It  is,  I' was  seeking,  0 7 desiring  to  write  to  the  Church , 
but  he  who  loves  to  be  first  among  you , Diotrephes , receives  us  not  * 
But  he  who  loves  to  bear  the  primacy  among  them , i.e.  in  the  Church. 
This  Greek  is  </>/X©4rg«r*uwr,  ambitious  of  the  primacy.  Wherefore 
Diotrephes  seems  to  have  been  either  a bishop,  or  else  some  power- 
ful and  arrogant  man,  who  was  fond  of  domineering  in  the  Church, 
and  arrogated  to  himself  episcopal  rank.  Bede  adds  that  he  was  a 
heresiarcl^  But  S.  John  intimates  nothing  of  the  kind;  indeed 
rather  the  contrary.  For  had  he  been  a heresiarch  S.  John  would 
have  dealt  much  more  severely  with  him,  and  have  excommunicated 
him,  as  S.  Paul  did  Hymenaeus  and  Alexander.  (1  Tim.  20.) 

. Diotrephes  then  hated  S.  John,  not  because  he  was  heretic,  but 
because  he  was  ambitious.  For  he  saw  that  S.  John  resisted  the  pre- 
eminence which  he  coveted. 

Dibtrephes : Vatablus  thinks  this  was  an  appellative  name,  mean- 
ing full  of  boasting  and  arrogance.  For  of  old  those  who  were 
puffed  up  by  the  nobility  of  their  extraction  were  accustomed  to  be 
called  diorpfalc,  i.e.  nourished  by  Jupiter.  But  L.  Dexter,  with 
more  reason,  thinks  that  it  was  a proper  name,  or  rather  one  given 
him.  For  he,  boasting  of  his  riches  and  birth  among  the  heathen, 
called  himself  by  a heathen  name,  Diotrephes , or  a son  of  Jove. 

Moraliter:  they  imitate  Diotrephes  who  covet  benefices  and 
prelacies,  and  assert  that  they  are  their  due  because  of  their  nobility 
and  their  wealth,  whereas  Christ  chose  for  His  Apostles  the  ignoble 
and  the  poor.  Again,  those  temporal  princes  and  nobles  imitate 
Diotrephes  who  having  no  rights  of  patronage  in  conferring  bene- 
fices usurp  and  invade  them,  or  abuse  them  by  domineering  over  the 
clergy. 

Receives  us  not : i.e.  our  apostleship  and  authority,  our  letters  and 

our  precepts.  For  it  was  part  of  the  bishop’s  office  to  receive  the 
vol.  v.  2 K 


Digitized  by  C joogle 


THIRD  EPISTLE  OF  S.  JOHN. 


U4 

letters  addressed  to  his  Ghurch,  and  to  read  them  publicly  to  the 
faithful.  For  he  was,  as  it  were,^he  head  and  primate  of  the  Church. 

Ver.  io. — I ipill  remember  his  works . Some  read,  though  incor- 
rectly, I will  remove  his  works . Others  read,  I will  mark  his  works  ; 

other#  I will  judge . Observe  S.  John's  gentleness  in  rebuking  and 

• * 

correcting. 

* Prating  against  us  with  malicious  words , i.e.  raising  calumnies 
against,  detracting  and  maligning  me.  The  Greek  is  i.e.  to 

trifle , babble^  prate.  # * 

Neither  doth  he  himself  receive  the  brethren , i.e.  orthodox  Christians. 
He  receives  none  but  the  pseudo-Christians  of  his  own  party. 

And  those  who  do  receive  them  he  casts  out  of  the  Church, , both  from 
the  place  and  assembly  of  the  Church,  especially  the  ^agape  and 
feast  after  the  Eucharist,  and  also  from  the  company  of  the  faithful 
by  excommunicating  them. 

Ver.  n. — Do  not  imitate  the  evil:  do  not  imitate  the  proud,  im- 
pious, and  inhospitable  Diotrephes,  even  though  he  does  occupy  the . 
chief  place  in  the  Church,  but  rather  imitate  the  humble,  pious,  and 
hospitable  Demetrius,  of  whom  in  ver.  12. 

He  who  does  good  is  of  God \ &c.  This  is  especially  applicable  to 
the  good  of  kindness  and  beneficence.  And  this  is  the  chief  meaning 
of  the  Greek  dyaQovotiiv,  which  is  to  benefit , ox  do  a kindness  to 
any  one.  For  S.  John  is  here  treating  of  kindness  and  hospitality. 
For  this  he  praises  Caius,  whilst  he  condemns  the  unkindness  of 
Diotrephes.  He  is  alluding  to  what  he  says  in  his  first  Epist.  iii.  6. 
The  meaning  is,  He  who  does  to  them  that  need — as,  for  instance, 
by  receiving  guests  and  pilgrims,  as  thou  doest,  O Caius— is  of  God. 
He  knows,  loves,  and  worships  Him.  But  he  who  does  ill  to  his 
neighbour,  as  Diotrephes  does,  is  not  of  God : he  neither  sees,  nor 
hath  seen  Him  : that  is,  practically,  he  does  not  know  God,  because 
he  does  not  love,  imitate,  or  worship  Him.  Although  indeed  every 
virtue  is  of  God,  the  words  especially  apply  to  charity  and  beneficence. 
For  it  is  an  attribute  of  God  that  He  communicates  Himself  and 
His  good  things,  and  doeth  good. 

The  reason  is,  because  it  is  a property  of  God  so  to  abound  in 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


SEEING  GOD. 


515 


all  good  that  He  overflows,  and  pours  out  his  goodness  by  bestowing 
it  upon  others.  He  therefore  that  shows  kindness  is  a child  and  an 
imitator  of  the  good  and  kind  God. 

He  that  doeth  evil  hath  not  seen  God.  The  direct  antithesis  would 
have  been,  is  not  of  God \ but  S.  John  amplifies,  saying,  so  much  is  he 
not  of  God,  that  he  does  not  see,  le . practically  know  God.  He 
who  is  unkind,  and  does  evil  to  his  neighbour,  does  not  truly  see, 
i.e.  know  God  practically,  because  he  does  not  acknowledge  God’s 
infinite  and  unceasing  kindnesses  to  hinqfcelf,  so  as  to  show 
himself  grateful  for  them  by  showing  kindness  to  others  for  God’s 
sake. 

S.  Dionysius,  writing  to  the  same  Caius,  the  Therapeut,  i.e.  the 
Seer  and  Contemplative,  which  is  the  reason  why  the  Apostle  speaks 
of  seeing  God,  alludes  to  these  words  of  the  Apostle.  And  he 
explains  in  what  way  good  and  perfect  men,  especially  Therapeuts 
like  Caius,  see  God  : “ If  there  be  any  one  who  when  he  has  seen 

God  has  understood  what  he  has  seen,  he  hath  not  seen  Him,  but 
something  of  Him  which  is  and  is  known.  But  He  Himself  being 
placed  in  high  above  all  understanding  and  all  being,  far  surpasses 
all  understanding.”  For  God  being  in  Himself  invisible  transcends 
all  things,  and  inhabits  the  unapproachable  light,  which  is  to  us 
impenetrable  darkness,  as  the  same  Dionysius  teaches  elsewhere. 
He  proves  the  same  thing  by  the  example  of  S.  Paul,  who,  although 
he  was  rapt  up  to  God,  nevertheless  declares  that  God  surpasses  all 
understanding  and  knowledge.  Hence  also  our  John  the  Evangelist 
says  in  his  Gospel  (i.  18),  “No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time,” 
namely,  by  any  clear  vision.  For  men  have  seen  Him  imperfectly 
by  faith,  according  to  the  words,  “ now  we  see  through  a mirror  in 
an  enigma.”  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12.  Vulg.) 

Ver.  12. — To  Demetrius  testimony  is  borne  by  all , concerning  his 
hospitality,  probity,  and  all  other  Christian  virtues.  He  proposes 
him  therefore  to  Caius  for  imitation  and  assistance.  Our  Serarius 
conjectures  that  this  Demetrius  was  the  same  as  the  chief  of  the 
craftsmen  of  Diana,  who  raised  a tumult  against  S.  Paul  at  Ephesus 
(Acts  xix.  24),  who  afterwards  repented,  and  changed  his  persecution 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


THIRD  EPISTLE  OF  S.  JOHN. 


516 

for  the  propagation  of  the  faith.  But  there  is  no  mention  of  this  in 
any  ancient  history. 

And  by  the  truth  itself:  the  testimony  of  men  may  be  erroneous, 
but  the  testimony  of  the  truth  can  never  be  deceptive.  The  truth 
bears  testimony  to  Demetrius.  That  is,  Demetrius  leads  a truly 
Christian  life,  and  does  Christian  works.  His  life  therefore  is  a true 
witness  to  his  virtue. 

We  also  bear  witness , which  is  most  weighty  and  certain,  inasmuch 
as  it  is  episcopal,  ap<5stolic,  and  canonical,  as  being  that  of  one  of 
the  sacred  writers. 

Ver.  14. — Salute  the  friends  by  name . The  Syriac  renders  this 
verse,  The  friends  pray  for  your  peace:  pray  for  the  peace  of  the 
friends , for  every  one  by  name . 


THE  END 


Digitized  by  v^iOOQLe 


'VvS 

l->o 

\°v0^ 

'\l.  & 


Digitized  by 


Google 


